In 1985, Marmot decided to test those hypotheses. He launched the Whitehall II Study to examine health inequalities, with a special emphasis on hierarchy and status. Whitehall is the name of a road in the Westminster area of London, where many of the British government’s offices are located. The study set out to track 10,308 British civil servants over their careers in government. Because the comparisons were being made between people in the same profession and often among people who started at the same rank, Marmot could neutralize a lot of the other confounding variables that might get in the way of figuring out which effects were caused by rank and hierarchy and which weren’t. It compared apples to apples much more than previous studies.
Moreover, because the same people were being measured over time, Marmot was able to see how relative status changes affected health in the same individuals. “At the entry to the study,” Marmot tells me, “you take people of a certain seniority level and look at the trajectory of that cohort. Where would the average be for that group ten years later? And then you look at whether those people were above or below that average—in other words, had they done better than the average or worse?” With that method, Marmot’s team could track a group of people who entered the civil service at the same time, even at the same rank, and then see how their health outcomes diverged over time in relation to their promotions. Plus, because the band of civil service salaries is narrower than what you get in the private sector, money wouldn’t be as much of a factor. Participants were surveyed initially in 1985, and every two to five years ever since.
In the data, Marmot discovered a crude but clear relationship: the higher up the hierarchy you climbed, the lower your mortality. Marmot calls this the Status Syndrome. Those in the lowest strata who stayed there had triple the mortality of those who ascended to the higher echelons of power. This was, at first glance, perplexing, because it went against the assumed relationship between higher-stress jobs and health. “People said, ‘Well, stress can’t be important,’ ” Marmot tells me. “Surely high grades are under more stress than low grades—you know, if you’ve got deadlines and ministers calling on you all the time. And I thought, ‘Yeah, higher-ranked people are under more stress.’ ” But Marmot got a stroke of insight when he began looking at questions that focused less on rank and more on control—the ability to shape events in the workplace. “I realized it’s not just the pressure,” Marmot says. “It’s the combination of high demand and low control. And I realized: that explains everything in our data.”
The more Marmot and his team of researchers sliced and diced the data, the clearer this relationship was. People who faced immense pressure at work (what Marmot calls demand) were fine so long as they also felt a high degree of control. But for people who felt under a lot of pressure and didn’t feel that they were in the driver’s seat (or able to at least move the steering wheel from time to time), their health outcomes were much worse. We don’t need to be dictators, but we do need to feel that we have a say over decisions within our professional lives.
Marmot had found that the conventional wisdom—that more power would cause bad health outcomes because of added stress—is wrong. The reason it’s wrong, however, is surprising. It turns out that there’s quite a big gap between what we often call stress and what actually stresses our bodies in harmful ways.
Stanford biologist Robert Sapolsky has found—in studying both baboons and humans—that stress is a crucial tool in survival. When our bodies are functioning properly, stress causes a series of biological changes that help us. Again, let’s think back to our Stone Age ancestors. Say you’re out for your morning walk, hoping to do a bit of hunting and a dash of gathering before breakfast, when, suddenly, a saber-toothed tiger comes over a ridge and bares its fangs in your general direction. Both you and the tiger have a stress-induced reaction. The body pauses its normal digestion, redirecting energy from producing long-term fat stores and injecting it into the bloodstream right away. This makes sense. You and the tiger are both going to need extra energy for what’s about to happen. Because digestion is paused, saliva production slows (which, as Sapolsky notes, explains why we get dry mouth when we’re nervous). Long-term processes that are necessary for good health, such as growth and tissue repair, are put on hold, too. This is a welcome bit of bodily triage, since you might not have any tissues left to repair if the saber-toothed tiger catches you. The hypothalamus simultaneously tells the pituitary glands to spring to action. The sympathetic nervous system kicks into high gear, releasing hormones that raise your heart rate and blood pressure. Adrenaline floods into your bloodstream. If everything works the right way, it gives you a better chance at survival. We know this in colloquial terms as the fight-or-flight response.I Stress is designed to help save us.
But just as so much else in our modern lives has diverged from our Stone Age evolutionary design, so, too, has the stress response. Anyone who fears public speaking and has gotten in front of a crowd to deliver an address has felt something similar to what our ancestors felt in the presence of a predator—a classic stress response. It’s perfectly normal and isn’t usually a big deal. But the problem, as both Marmot and Sapolsky argue, is that our fight-or-flight stress response has, in some workplaces or lifestyles, become a chronic condition rather than a short-term emergency one. The grind of certain jobs, rather than an exceptional break-the-glass moment in the face of a deadly predator, puts us into stress mode. What should only be acute stress is now, for too many of us, routine.
One reason why this relationship is so difficult to understand is because modern society uses the word stress to refer to things that are intense, but not biologically stressful. Plenty of high-powered jobs are intense (or have “high demand” as Marmot would say) but aren’t stressful because we enjoy them immensely and are able to shape their outcomes (by having “high control”). The CEO who is watching his or her start-up take off might say that their meteoric rise is “stressful” when it’s not remotely stressful in physiological terms. It’s exhilarating and wonderful. Intense, hard work doesn’t inhibit normal health processes the same ways that biological stress does. Because we conflate the two in our daily speech, we often misattribute to stress what is actually passion or intensity.
According to Marmot’s research, however, you do get a harmful biological stress response if you hold a low-status position. But the same effect also exists for high-status positions that combine high demand with low control. A mistreated custodian is always likely to face adverse health consequences from lack of control, but a CEO can, too, in certain circumstances. So how does this manifest in the real world? Unfortunately (even though it would make good reality TV) we can’t answer that question with experiments that permanently swap CEOs and custodians to see what happens. Instead, we have to turn back to our primate cousins for answers.
Alpha Males from Baboons to the Boardroom
Most PhD students pore over dusty books in libraries, stare at spreadsheets, or toil as grunts in a lab. Not so for Professor Jenny Tung’s student Jordan Anderson, who spent part of his early doctoral research at Duke University practicing his skills at hiding out of sight while shooting blow darts through a tube. “You get the hang of it after a while,” he tells me.
The blow darts are used to tranquilize baboons from a distance so that they can be studied. But crucially, to avoid messing up the research, it’s essential that the source of the tranquilizer is neither seen nor heard by the baboons, lest they start to associate their human handlers with the strange experience of feeling a sharp prick followed by a sudden feeling of intense drowsiness as they keel over and sleep.
Anderson, Tung, and a postdoctoral researcher, Rachel Johnston, conduct studies on baboons in Kenya’s Amboseli National Park, near the slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro. They explore the lives and biology of baboons to gain insights into human evolution, aging, and health. If we could understand what a baboon was thinking or communicating about hierarchy and status, perhaps we could better understand ourselves. For, as Charles Darwin once put it, “He who understands baboon would do more toward human metaphysics than Locke.”II
Tung’s research team wanted to know whether power and status affect the rate of aging. To figure that out, they relied on an innovative method that examines rates of change within our genes. The biological script of our lives (or the lives of baboons) is composed of a DNA sequence that never gets edited no matter how long we live. It’s fixed. Yet, our bodies change significantly over time. The secret to understanding how a static script can produce massive change lies with gene regulation—the “switching” of genes on or off. Some of that regulation is irregular, meaning those genes switch on and off at various times depending on a whole host of external factors. But certain sections of the genome switch on and off at regular intervals, like a ticking clock.
One such clock is a process called DNA methylation. Of the A’s, G’s, C’s, and T’s that make up our DNA, the C’s (or cytosine) are most likely to get affected by that process. As Tung tells me, it produces “a little chemical mark, just an extra carbon and some hydrogens that gets sort of welded on to bases in our DNA, particularly in things like baboons and things like us.” If you measure the rate of methylation over time, you can get a good proxy measure of our “genetic” aging, which is completely separate from how many birthdays we’ve celebrated.
“It’s really clear to us that some individuals who are sixty are physiologically much less healthy than the average sixty-year-old,” Tung explains. “And some individuals who are sixty are much more healthy than the average sixty-year-old, in a way that sort of percolates down to the level of the cell.” If you look around you, this isn’t surprising. We notice all the time when someone’s age diverges from how the person appears. The method used by Tung’s team is a much more precise way of measuring that divergence, exploring whether an individual baboon is aging faster or slower in biological age than its calendar age would predict.
With students such as Jordan Anderson blow darting the baboons (245 of them, to be precise), the team tested the genetic aging of the baboon colony and saw how it matched up with social rank within that colony. The most obvious theory would be that low social rank would lead to faster aging and that higher social rank would lead to slower aging, precisely because higher-ranked baboons get more food along with their pick of mates. But the findings were more surprising. High-ranking males aged much faster. One ambitious male baboon who was rapidly ascending in social rank was tested once at a reasonably low social rank and then tested ten months later after his position had substantially improved. Even though only ten months had passed, his predicted aging (based on biological markers) had increased by nearly three years, as though time had been sped up. In the baboon data, the two individuals who saw the biggest slowdown in their predicted biological aging were the two individuals who descended the social hierarchy fastest. As Tung, Anderson, and Johnston put it in their study, rising to the top does confer significant advantages in finding a mate, but it comes with a significant cost—a “live fast, die young” strategy for baboons.
However, there’s also considerable evidence that it’s quite bad to be a low-ranking baboon. Over thirty years of studying hundreds of baboons in the Kenyan savanna, Stanford’s Robert Sapolsky has demonstrated that low-ranking baboons have worse rates of high blood pressure, lower levels of good cholesterol, worse immune systems, and a slower return to normal bodily functioning when they face a stressful situation. However, Sapolsky—more in line with the findings from Tung’s group—also demonstrated that life at the top can be stressful for alpha males, particularly during power struggles. Sapolsky’s theory was straightforward: it’s good to be the baboon king, but when there’s the risk of an uprising, it’s just as stressful—maybe even more so—than being a baboon peasant.
Sapolsky’s theory was bolstered by a 2011 study led by Laurence Gesquiere of Princeton, in which his team measured glucocorticoid, a stress-related hormone. They found that the higher up the primate hierarchy an individual climbed, the less stress it had. But there was an exception: the alpha males at the pinnacle were extraordinarily stressed. It led the researchers to a conclusion at odds with our conventional thinking. The best position to occupy was the beta male slot, where you could get access to all the spoils of power without the risk that comes with being the baboon sovereign.
But is this all just baboon trivia or do the same dynamics exist in modern humans? Is it good to be a manager but bad to be a CEO? And how do these baboon studies intersect with Marmot’s Whitehall II research and his concepts of high demand and low control?
Four economists may have found answers in a 2020 study—one that helps us determine whether Darwin was right that baboons offer a compelling, albeit slightly furrier, glimpse of humanity. Led by Mark Borgschulte of the University of Illinois, the economists decided to answer two questions. First, do CEOs age faster when they’re under more stress? Second, do CEOs die faster when they’re under stress? To explore those questions, they started by exploiting a brilliant natural experiment from American corporate history.
In the mid-1980s, American states began passing “anti-takeover” laws, which made it harder for a corporate raider to take over a company. These laws made it less stressful to be a CEO because they ensured greater job security while reducing the risk of an abrupt hostile conquest. Using clever research techniques, the researchers compared nearly two thousand (mostly male) CEOs who had been in charge during the higher-stress condition—the Wild West of corporate raids before the laws—and the lower-stress condition, after the laws protected them. CEOs who spent more time being in charge after the laws were put in place lived longer than CEOs who were in charge during the more stressful period. As the authors put it, “For a typical CEO in our sample, the effect of experiencing the [reduced stress from the] anti-takeover laws is roughly equivalent to that of making the CEO two years younger.”
Of course, CEO jobs aren’t all equally stressful. To put it more precisely, while all CEOs might describe their jobs as “stressful,” some CEOs are likely to face more biological stress than others. Being in charge of, say, Delta Airlines or British Airways during a devastating pandemic probably puts more damaging stress on you than being the CEO of a company that sells webcams or home gym equipment. Working under that assumption, the economists compared CEOs who reigned over companies that were experiencing substantial industrywide crises to those who weren’t. Sure enough, CEOs who oversaw a company during a disastrous period for their industry died sooner than those who didn’t. (Similarly, a study, published in the British Medical Journal, that spanned several centuries and included seventeen countries found that politicians who won elections and subsequently served in office died sooner than runners-up who lost elections and never served. The burden of stress that comes with serving in the political fray appears to shorten the lives of politicians.
So, some evidence suggests that becoming the top dog makes us die sooner. But what about during life? Do CEOs who faced particularly stressful periods appear to age faster than those who don’t? That aging is separate from the aging that Tung and her team measured using the DNA clock with baboons, because it focuses on how we look outwardly, not on chemical markers inside our genome. Still, the concept of stress-based aging shouldn’t be unfamiliar. We’ve all seen the before-and-after photos of American presidents who enter the White House youthful but emerge after four or eight years with many more wrinkles and a large outcropping of gray hairs. But the researchers—led by Mark Borgschulte—wanted to systematically test whether that effect that we seem to notice holds up under scientific scrutiny.
To check, they used machine learning. The computer code involved is complex, but the idea is simple. They fed 250,000 individuals’ faces into a computer so that it could “learn” to identify physical markers of human aging. A wrinkle or a bit of gray here, a bit more ear hair sprouting there. Over time, the model is refined, getting better and better at spotting subtle differences that change over time—differences that the human eye might not even be able to pick out. Then, they had the model analyze pictures of CEOs at various times throughout their tenure as the alpha of their company. When the model spit out the results, the verdict was clear: genuinely stressful periods make us appear to age faster. The CEOs who oversaw a company hit hard by the Great Recession of 2008–9 looked as though they’d aged a full year faster over the following decade than those CEOs who didn’t oversee a company during such a stressful shock. Forget the expensive wrinkle cream. Instead, be sure to ditch the stress that comes with high status and low control.
So, how can we reconcile Marmot’s theories generated from the Whitehall II Study, the findings from baboons in Kenya’s savannas, and subordinate monkeys getting hooked on cocaine in the lab? What they all have in common is an agreement that being low on the social pecking order is terrible for your health. That research is clear: being low status kills you faster.
The picture becomes murkier as individuals rise toward dominance. Studies do seem to point to a much more complex interplay between power, control, rank, and health at the higher echelons. Results are mixed. It seems safe to say, however, that being higher status does insulate you from bad health outcomes—but only to a point. Being high status without high levels of control over your destiny can damage your body. Being high status in a moment of crisis can make you age faster and die younger. And being an alpha—all alone at the top—can be disastrous for your health, particularly when the risk of being toppled from that position is real. In baboons, that risk of losing power is always lurking in the savanna, so elevated rank always seems to accelerate biological aging. CEOs are different, with some constantly worrying about getting fired while others have job security. That variation in stressors creates discrepancies in the health-related effects of power for humans. Regardless, the evidence suggests that having too little or too much power can damage your health, whereas ascending to somewhere in the upper-middle part of the social ladder is often just right.
However, before you start reevaluating whether you really want that promotion after all, there’s some good news. Whether you’re a low-status worker stressed by precariousness, a high-status CEO weathering the aftermath of a pandemic, or a drug kingpin just trying to stay alive, there are some ways that you can protect yourself from the corrosive health effects of having too little or too much power. That protection is within everyone’s grasp.
We Get By with a Little Help from Our Friends
Between 1997 and 2001, 159 men and 175 women willingly walked into a lab, had a bit of the common cold virus squirted into their nose, quarantined for six days in separate rooms, then walked out $800 richer. This was for a study about the biology of disease—but with a twist. Prior to the quarantine period and the deliberate addition of the virus into the volunteers, researchers had participants fill out a series of questionnaires. One related to social relationships. The researchers asked participants how many people they had spoken to that day, how many conversations that lasted more than ten minutes they had had in the previous twenty-four hours, as well as the social roles they generally occupy (mother, husband, colleague, mentor, coach, etc.). Using these metrics, the researchers developed a “sociability” score to rank participants from extroverted social butterflies to Unabomber-style hermits. Then the researchers collected other data to ensure that any correlation they sought and found wasn’t due to something else (such as preexisting health issues, body mass index, race, education level, and the like). Once they had all the data they needed, the participants got the virus injected into their nostrils and began their quarantine.
The researchers sat back and waited for the sniffles to appear. On each day of the six-day quarantine, the participants were assessed for symptoms of the common cold. The scientists measured mucus production, gave people some dye through the nostrils and jotted down how long it took to reach their throat (compared to pre-infection levels), and used a series of similar objective metrics that allowed patients to be compared with scientific rigor. When the numbers were crunched, those who had low sociability scores were three times more likely to develop common cold symptoms than those who had high sociability scores, even though all had received the same dose of virus. That striking finding suggests that having a robust social network can improve our health by reducing stress and improving our overall well-being. In contrast, being low status, powerless, and lonely is a deadly mix. (This finding may partially reflect that more social people get exposed to more viruses and are therefore more resilient once exposed in a lab experiment. But that doesn’t explain all of the variation.)
It’s not fully clear how social networks boost immune function on a biological level, but some preliminary insights are offered by other species. Professor Tung at Duke (with the blow darts and the baboons) has also examined how status affects the disease-fighting prowess of macaques, the same species used in Nader’s cocaine studies. Tung’s group artificially varied status among the macaques, taking dominant individuals and putting them into groups where they’d become subordinate and vice versa. By manipulating status experimentally, they could isolate cause and effect. They would first take a sample from a monkey in a dominant role, then take a sample from the same monkey once it entered a subordinate role. Because it’s the same individual and the only thing that has changed is the status, the researchers can figure out what effect status is having on the monkey biologically. (Experimentally varying the status of humans would violate ethics rules, which is why such experiments have only been done in some nonhuman primates.)
Monkeys who moved from dominant to subordinate status had worse immune system functioning. Similarly, monkeys who moved from subordinate to dominant status had a boosted immune response. But because the real world is often surprising, the data had two interesting wrinkles. First, dominant monkeys had immune responses that were fine-tuned to fight off viruses, whereas subordinate monkeys were better equipped to fight off bacteria—a perplexing finding that shows the baffling complexity of social rank and biology. Second, much like with the study of colds and social relationships, subordinate monkeys who were frequently groomed—a social practice that involves cleaning but is also used to reinforce bonds between two individuals—had more resilient immune systems than those who weren’t.
Our primate cousins can therefore teach us some important lessons. People who are facing significant biological stressors due to powerlessness and low status, or high status with a lack of control, can likely ward off the negative effects of stress by building better social relationships. Our biology will be affected by our place in the social hierarchy, but we can blunt the negative effects with a little help from our friends. Crucially, unlike with non-human primates, our social status isn’t monolithic. People who are low on the pecking order within their company might nonetheless be high on the pecking order at their church or synagogue or mosque. They might be a revered captain within their community softball team. Or, they could just be well respected by a loving, supportive family in which they feel powerful and in control. The densely woven tapestry of our modern social life gives us opportunities to cheat the risks of death and aging that are uniformly tied to a more one-dimensional social rank in less socially complex species.
If you want to be healthy, increase how much control you have over your life whenever possible—particularly if you’re low on the social ladder, or you’re near the top of it. But since most people can’t just wave a magic wand and find themselves more in control, the easier path is, if you’re going to go for that promotion, make sure it doesn’t come at the expense of those you care about and love.
On that cheerful note, we now turn to the most daunting puzzles of the book. If corruptible people want power more, are better at getting power, and some good people are corrupted by wielding it, how can we invert those dynamics? What can be done to fix it? It’s time to figure out how to make sure that more good people seek power, get it, and stay good once they’re in charge.
I. Recent research has suggested that the fight-or-flight response differs in men and women, with women more likely to have a “tend-and-befriend” response. The tend refers to protecting the vulnerable (such as children), and the befriend refers to finding others to help with mutual defense.
II. This refers to the British political philosopher John Locke.








X ATTRACTING THE INCORRUPTIBLE
Lesson 1: Actively Recruit Incorruptible People and Screen Out Corruptible Ones
In the early hours of October 16, 2010, Didacus Snowball and his girlfriend, C.T., were getting ready to turn in for the night. It was well below freezing outside, with a brisk coastal wind howling around their house. That wasn’t particularly unusual for late autumn in Stebbins, a little Alaskan village of around five hundred residents right on the Bering Sea, just two hundred miles south of the arctic circle. But it was warm inside as the couple climbed into bed. Then, they heard a loud knock. Didacus moved across the room and opened the door to see who it was.
As the door swung open, the man outside rushed in. He attacked Didacus, punching him in the face, pinning him to the ground, and strangling him with his bare hands. C.T. screamed, shouting at the man to get out of the house and telling Didacus to run and get help from the nearby police station. He wrestled free of the man’s stranglehold and bolted out the door, hoping to find an officer on duty. But with Didacus out of the house, the intruder set upon C.T., knocked her to the ground, wrapped both hands around her neck, and started choking her. As she tried to cry out, her breath faded under the tight grip of his fingers. Everything went black. She lost consciousness.
When she came to a few minutes later, the intruder—she recognized him as a local resident named Nimeron Mike—was on top of her. She looked down and, with horror, saw he was trying to remove her jeans. Eventually, C.T. managed to wriggle out from under the weight of his body. She grabbed an unloaded rifle just within reach. C.T. hit Mike in the head with it. It bought her time to move away.
Just in time, the police arrived. Mike was arrested. He was convicted and placed on Alaska’s sex offender registry for attempted sexual assault. It wasn’t Mike’s first brush with the law. In total, he’d served six years behind bars for a variety of crimes: domestic violence, assault, reckless driving, groping another woman, drunk driving, and stealing a car.
A decade later, if Didacus Snowball and C.T. had been attacked in their home by an intruder, Nimeron Mike might have been involved again. But this time, he’d have shown up in uniform and carrying a badge. That’s because Nimeron Mike, a man with a rap sheet as long as the Stebbins airstrip, had become one of the village’s sworn police officers.
“I’d have this fact—that someone was a current police officer,” Kyle Hopkins, an investigative reporter for the Anchorage Daily News, tells me. “And I would look up their background and it wouldn’t make sense because they would have these convictions that would seemingly preclude them from being a police officer.” For years, Hopkins kept seeing this pattern: criminals becoming cops. The pattern stood out most in Alaska’s remote, isolated villages.
Hopkins decided to do a deep dive. Partnering with ProPublica, he broke a major story. His reporting won a Pulitzer Prize for uncovering a startling fact: convicted repeat offenders were being hired as police officers with astonishing frequency in Alaska. It shouldn’t have been happening. But it was. And in Stebbins, Hopkins discovered another shocking fact. Every officer—every single one—had been convicted of domestic violence. If your boyfriend or husband was beating you, calling the cops just ensured that another abuser would come to your house. The rot went right up to the top, too. The police chief had been convicted of seventeen crimes, including felony assault and sexual abuse of a minor. The crooks had taken over the station.
How could that have happened?
The answer is simple. There weren’t any qualified applicants. The Stebbins residents who were qualified didn’t apply. And the criminals who couldn’t find work elsewhere were only too happy to trade an orange jumpsuit for a blue uniform. The city administrator, Joan Nashoanak, stresses that the job postings always specify that applicants can’t be felons and can’t have been convicted of a misdemeanor within the last five years. But whenever a new officer was needed, the city had to waive that requirement. The choice the city faced was between an officer who was a felon, or no officer at all. “We can’t find anybody else without a criminal background,” Nashoanak told Hopkins. When Hopkins tracked down Nimeron Mike as part of Hopkins’s investigative reporting in Stebbins, Mike said that mere hours after he applied for the job, he was sworn in as an officer. “Am I a cop now? It’s like that easy?” he remembered wondering at the time.
Stebbins is an extreme cautionary tale for what happens when you don’t have a deep enough applicant pool and you don’t think carefully about recruitment. You’ll scrape the bottom of the barrel and end up with lots of awful people in positions of authority.
So here’s the trillion-dollar question: How can we make sure that better people try to gain power?
When it comes to recruitment, there are three main answers. First, get plenty of applicants. Second, proactively seek out the kind of people that you want in power. And third, devote sufficient resources to screen out the corrupt and corruptible people who self-select into positions of authority. Stebbins failed on all three fronts. It’s an extreme case, but it’s far from unique in that trifecta of failure.
When trying to expand the pool of applicants, you need to pursue both deepening and broadening. A deeper applicant pool is one in which you get a larger number of similar applicants to what you already have, which allows you to be pickier. A broader applicant pool is one in which you recruit applicants who are significantly different from what you already have, which allows you to innovate and improve. Both are useful for improving outcomes, particularly when they occur in tandem.
Think of assembling a packet of M&M’s that contains thirty candies. If you manufacture precisely thirty green ones and no others, there’s no room for error. You have to include all the chipped, broken, and discolored ones. All will be green. If you make sixty green ones instead, you’ll still have a green-only pack, but you can at least pick the thirty best ones. The broken ones will get discarded. That’s deepening.
If your candy scientists have a eureka moment and start to crank out brown, yellow, red, orange, tan, and blue M&M’s, that’s broadening. Better yet if they discover peanut M&M’s. The best pack of M&M’s is likely to be drawn from a deeper pool of candies within each color (so you can pick the best of a uniform bunch), but also from an expanded pool to include colors and kinds that didn’t previously exist—the human equivalent of fresh ideas, fresh skills, and fresh perspectives.
Broadening can also create a virtuous circle. Matthew Syed, author of Rebel Ideas, has convincingly shown how diverse thinking sparks innovation within organizations. But it also causes people who wouldn’t normally put themselves forward for leadership positions to start seeing themselves as future power holders. In an experiment in India, for example, some villages were randomly assigned a female leader. Others were randomly assigned a male leader. What happened? There was a clear-cut “role model effect.” Parents in the villages led by women started to expect more of their daughters, raising them to be more ambitious. And girls in those villages started to see themselves as potential future leaders, shifting their life choices in empowering ways. Broadening produces positive effects immediately, but it yields future dividends, too.
Think of someone in your life who would be a powerful moral force as a representative in Congress or Parliament, or who would be an inspiring, responsible CEO. Everyone knows plenty of people who would be phenomenal leaders if given the chance. But many, if not most, of those people wouldn’t want to touch politics or the corner office of a major corporation with a ten-foot pole. The challenge facing us is figuring out how to get more of those shy incorruptibles to start competing with the overconfident narcissistic corruptibles who were born believing that they deserve power because they’re God’s gift to man.
However, many organizations never think about this problem when designing recruitment protocols. When it’s time to find someone to put in charge, too many follow a predictable pattern: do what was done last time. I call this a QWERTY mistake, because they’re making the same kind of error as the one that explains why you’re used to typing out emails and text messages on an illogically designed keyboard.
In the late 1860s, the American inventor Christopher Latham Sholes produced the prototype for what would become the typewriter. The early versions of typewriters were set up with an intuitive keyboard design: a lower row that ran alphabetically from A to M and an upper row that continued from N to Z. If you knew the alphabet, you knew where to find each letter. But there was a problem. The mechanical machines were prone to jamming if people clicked the keys too quickly, especially if two letters in rapid succession were next to each other. So, Sholes gave his son-in-law, a school superintendent in Pennsylvania, a crucial task: figure out which letters occur together most often in the English language. The results of his amateur analysis were used to design a new keyboard layout that aimed to separate sequential letters in the alphabet that were likely to be needed back-to-back, such as S and T, or N and O. They came up with a design that’s almost identical to today’s QWERTY layout. Their arrangement of the keys had an added bonus. Because the layout was utterly confusing, nobody could type fast enough to jam the machines.I
Fast-forward 120 years. Computer keyboards had eliminated the problem of mechanical jamming. But everyone who was typing on a computer had already learned the QWERTY layout. The early tech companies faced a choice: optimize computer typing forever with something better, or stick with the existing way of doing things even though the problem it was designed to solve had disappeared. As you’re well aware, they chose to stick with the old way. (Social scientists refer to this phenomenon as path dependency—in which a new decision is based largely on previous decisions. This often results in a worse outcome, but is viewed as the path of least resistance at the time.) When recruitment efforts replicate the old model by fishing out the same language for the job advertisement, or recruiting out of the same pool of people as before, that’s the QWERTY approach to deciding who’s in charge. It’s time to get rid of it.
Recruitment on autopilot isn’t just problematic because it fails to deepen or broaden the applicant pool. It also too often reproduces biases, because organizations that have changed their culture to be more inclusive haven’t always updated their recruitment process in the same way. Multiple randomized experiments have demonstrated that the language used in recruitment advertisements for leadership positions makes an enormous difference in who applies. For example, language is often subtly gendered. Researchers have found consistent evidence that a recruitment ad that refers to something like establishing “dominance over the competition” is perceived by prospective applicants as indicating a more male-heavy organization. Such aggressive language has been shown to reduce the number of women who apply to those positions of authority. Because the bias is subtle, you need to consciously counteract it.
Getting it right isn’t rocket science. At Carnegie Mellon University, the faculty noticed that just 7 percent of computer science majors were women. They tossed out their old way of doing things—got rid of the QWERTY typewriter so to speak—and completely revamped the way they spoke about computer science. They reformed inflexible prerequisites that could scare off potential majors. They proactively sought out a deeper and broader pool of potential majors. The result? Within a few years, the department went from 7 percent women to 42 percent women. They didn’t need quotas. They just thought more carefully about what factors might broaden out the pool of students that would come to them. It worked.
Here’s the takeaway: if you’re trying to find the right person for a powerful position, you should think carefully about what kind of person you want to apply, join the police academy, or run for office. It shouldn’t just be about lines on a résumé or specific skills, but should also consider other measures such as personality traits and the person’s past track record with teamwork. To get better political candidates, political parties and civil society organizations need to do a much better job of drafting in morally principled people who would grudgingly go into politics as a public service, not eagerly as a way to enrich themselves, get famous, or grandstand for their ego. Plenty of innovative leaders are within the ranks of apolitical professions—leaders in education, health care, and science to name a few—who would likely make excellent public servants, but have never seriously considered it. With a bit more effort put into breaking the QWERTY recruitment mold, that can change.
Better screening is also essential. In a single job interview, a charming narcissist can present a very different impression from what might be gleaned from a more thorough review. More rigorous vetting might seem as if it’d be costly. But for those seeking significant power, a more thorough review at the early stages is likely to save a ton of time, money, and avoidable damage later. And for positions of enormous consequence, such as heads of state or CEOs of major companies, psychological evaluations for dark triad traits are probably wise, even if they’re currently considered unusual or insulting. At that level of power, the stakes are simply too high to worry about a brief bit of intrusive questioning. Whatever specific interventions are adopted, a big part of the battle is acknowledging a core problem: those who shouldn’t be in power are more likely to seek it. We need to design every system to try to screen out the corruptible, power-hungry candidates.
We shouldn’t pretend, however, that better recruitment will be a panacea. Getting sensible, moral people to put themselves forward for the responsibilities and risks of leadership will always be a challenge. As we’ve seen throughout earlier chapters, corruptible people are drawn to power like moths to a flame. So how else can we ensure that more incorruptible people get thrown into the mix? The answer may lie with an English ox and a bizarre little machine invented in ancient Greece.
Lesson 2: Use Sortition and Shadow Governance for Oversight
Francis Galton, an English polymath eugenicist with pork-chop sideburns, was obsessed with data. His personal motto was “Whenever you can, count.” This affinity for quantification, combined with his vile prejudices, caused him to behave in bizarre ways as he sought to translate the world into numbers. As Galton traveled across Victorian Britain in the late nineteenth century, he observed young women with particular interest. Using a contraption he called a “pricker,” which “consisted of a needle mounted on a thimble and a cross-shaped piece of paper,” he poked holes in his custom-designed record of female attractiveness. Then, he compiled his rankings from the pricker and created a “beauty map.” The results were admittedly of limited use. (In his subjective judgment, London came out on the top of the table. Aberdeen, in Scotland, was at the bottom.)
But many of Galton’s less loathsome attempts at quantification yielded more useful results. In 1906, he attended a rural-country fair. One of the amusements was a competition in which fairgoers were invited to guess the weight of an ox. Galton didn’t expect anyone to get the weight right, but he decided to do a statistical analysis of the responses nonetheless. When the competition closed, Galton analyzed the 787 guesses. What he found was remarkable. The median guess—the one smack-dab in the middle of all 787—was 1,208 pounds.II The mean guess—the statistical average—was 1,197 pounds.
The actual weight of the ox? Also 1,197 pounds.
Galton’s parable of the ox-weight-guessing competition (which was repopularized in the 2004 book The Wisdom of Crowds by James Surowiecki) doesn’t always work. Humans are sometimes badly wrong, even when our thoughts or opinions or guesses are aggregated. But when a reasonably random distribution of people puts their collective mind to solving a problem, they can sometimes perform exceptionally well. Some people will always be badly off, guessing three hundred or thirty thousand pounds. But if there are no systematic skews in the group of people guessing, then the low guesses usually just cancel out the high ones. What you’re left with is a large number of reasonable guesses.
The problem is that the group of people making decisions is just about always systematically biased in some way. It’s often as far from random as you could get. For example, since 1721, there have been fifty-five British prime ministers. Forty-one studied at either Oxford or Cambridge. And as we’ve already seen, people who seek power aren’t randomly distributed. They’re often quite abnormal relative to the rest of the population. The county-fair attendees were likely to be a much more representative slice of the local population, perhaps with the possible exception of the eugenicist hanging around with his pricker.
Real randomness can be particularly useful because it neutralizes the influence of people with an ax to grind or a hidden agenda. When guessing the weight of an ox, you’re likely motivated only by trying to get the right answer. The fairgoers weren’t influenced by political expediency or morally compromised by an urgent need to be reelected. Galton’s parable of the ox is therefore at odds with the way that decisions are usually made.
But the parable of the ox also offers another insight. If someone was trying to rig the contest, it would’ve been a lot easier to bribe the one person tallying the votes than to bribe 787 individuals to change their guesses. If power corrupts, it’s much harder to corrupt random groups of people than it is to corrupt the small, self-selecting group of corruptible people who thirst for power.
Several thousand years ago, the ancient Athenians believed in the incorruptible strength of random numbers. As a result, they designed a democratic anticorruption machine, a gargantuan slab of stone with rows of holes carefully carved into it. It was called the kleroterion. To make key decisions, citizens would place their pinakion, a personalized piece of wood or bronze, into the slots of the machine. Then, an official would turn a crank that would randomly release either a black or a white ball from the machine. If the ball was black, the top row of citizens were dismissed from consideration. If it was white, the randomly allocated row was tapped for duty. It was effectively like an ancient version of the lottery machines that have balls bouncing around, except in this case it was used to select decision makers rather than winning digits for a sweepstakes jackpot.
Using randomness to put citizens in positions of authority is called sortition. Some advocates of sortition argue that we should replace elections altogether and instead introduce governance by drawing lots. That proposal has many problems. It would undermine democratic choice. And some political tasks—such as negotiating a nuclear-test-ban treaty—require specific expertise cultivated over a career. But that doesn’t mean that sortition should be discarded altogether. Instead, it should be used to advise elected officials rather than to replace them.
Here’s how it could work. In politics, you could have a large annual Citizen Assembly chosen by a computerized version of the kleroterion. Think of it like paid jury duty on steroids. The assembly would serve for one year. It would select something like ten big issues to tackle for the year, perhaps with the input of elected officials. One year it might be issues related to climate change and tax reform, the next year health policy and transportation. Additionally, elected officials could request quick advisory opinions from the Citizen Assembly—answers to yes-or-no questions that are urgently being debated in the legislature. Is it a good idea to legally mandate wearing masks in crowded public spaces during a pandemic? Should we bomb Syria? Is it finally time to buy Greenland? The assembly would have the same access to expert opinions and advice as elected officials. Once the assembly members had discussed and debated, they would issue publicly available advisory opinions. Elected officials would be under no obligation to follow this advice, but the wisdom of the randomly selected crowd would be visible to everyone. If politicians had a different view, they’d at least have to explain why they were deviating from the assembly’s proposed solution.
The same model could be adapted for any large organization, from transnational corporations to police departments. Big companies could use sortition to create a shadow Board of Directors from the rank and file within the organization. Every time a major decision needed to be made, the shadow board would release its own views. That would force any aloof, out-of-touch boards to at least grapple with the view from below. Divorced from the myopia of the quarterly profit rat race, shadow boards could help prevent catastrophic failures by forcing their higher-ups to see big-picture concerns that are too often ignored. For public bodies, such as police departments, civilian review boards that evaluate misconduct could be supplemented by a shadow board of citizens that weighs in on major decisions that affect the operation of the department. The crowd will sometimes be wrong. But it’s healthy for those in power to have to sometimes listen to the carefully considered views of a random slice of people who are affected by their decisions.
Oversight by sortition has several virtues. First, because it’s random, it wouldn’t suffer from the problem of corruptible people seeking a position on a shadow board or a Citizen Assembly. Instead, many of the people in Citizen Assemblies and shadow boards would most likely be there grudgingly—and that would be a welcome change.
Second, when leaders are acting out of immorality or self-interest, it would often become obvious because it would be such a glaring contrast with the advice of the assembly or shadow board. The public would have confidence that those drafted into service by sortition aren’t making decisions to avoid upsetting lobbyists or because they’re worried about alienating a narrow interest group. Cronyism and nepotism would become much harder. Within business, a shadow board would have every reason to think longer term than the quarterly press release and be an antidote to those who are too myopic.
Third, while political systems are often geared toward deadlock, normal people tend to be geared toward compromise. When you and your friends can’t decide whether to go to Olive Garden or TGI Fridays, it’s rare to have someone walk away and launch attack ads at their rivals about the quality of the breadsticks. But politicians behave like that all the time. Including more normal people in decision-making would put pressure on those who are actually in power to gravitate toward sensible solutions rather than performative posturing.
One recent study provided concrete support for this approach. An experiment involving 864 participants in Zurich, Switzerland, compared power gained randomly to power gained via a competition. The researchers found that those who ended up in power by chance behaved with less hubris. Random selection is humbling in a way that winning a competition (such as an election) isn’t. While it’s just one study, it provides encouraging results. People who don’t want power might be most honorable at wielding it.
Better recruitment, combined with oversight by sortition, can make it less likely that bad people will make bad decisions. But because sortition can’t and shouldn’t be used for every position of authority, there’s still an important question: What about those bad apples that inevitably sneak through? What can we do to minimize the harm they can inflict on us?
Lesson 3: Rotate to Reduce Abuse
When Helen King was a police officer, one team in her department consistently seemed to punch above their weight: the undercover plainclothes officers who specialized in drug busts. “Everyone thought they were great,” King tells me. “Anytime a bit of intelligence came in, even late on a Friday night, they volunteered, they’d research it, they’d get a warrant, and they’d execute it. It was all really productive and really helpful.” On paper, they were standouts.
King later found out the real reason behind their eagerness and enthusiasm. Each time that team carried out a raid and found drug plants growing under heat lamps, they harvested them and sold them back to drug dealers. This profitable racket escaped detection for quite some time. How were the officers able to act like criminals and not get caught?
The team, by design, had become a sealed-off unit. Everyone in that unit was in on the racket. That meant no outsiders poking around or asking unwelcome questions. As long as they kept working hard to show off seemingly productive drug busts, the results spoke for themselves. (This sort of thing happens more often than you’d think. In 2014, one policeman in England was discovered with eleven kilos of cocaine in his washing machine, which is impressive mostly because British washing machines are tiny. Fitting eleven kilos of anything inside one is an astonishing feat.)
When King rose through the ranks and ended up as the assistant commissioner for the London Metropolitan Police with a focus on recruitment and training, she realized that the crooked drug cops had given her a valuable insight. “If you allow teams, whether it’s just two uniformed officers or an entire drugs team, to work in isolation from others and to work very closely over a long period of time, that’s where quite a lot of corruption cases will come out,” King warns. The solution is simple: rotate people around so nobody gets too comfortable. Fresh blood doesn’t just bring fresh perspectives. It also provides antibodies against corruption.
Rotation is important for two reasons. The first is obvious: anytime a group of people are colluding, an outsider presents a risk. The more outsiders pass through, the harder it is to successfully collude without getting caught. Plus, when insiders who know about crooked dealings move elsewhere, they might spill the beans. Some organizations, countries, or teams have such an ingrained culture of corruption that no amount of rotation will make a difference. Rotten in, rotten out. But much of the time, the added risk of exposure from rotation is a deterrent. It stops abuse before it happens. (The logic is similar to that of banks that require employees in sensitive positions to take two weeks of consecutive vacation time each year. It’s akin to a two-week rotation. Without someone to cook the books for a few weeks, ongoing fraud is often uncovered when someone fills in for the fraudster.)
Rotation is also important for an unexpected reason, related to something called the Peter Principle. The concept, which was coined by its namesake, Laurence J. Peter, asserts that people tend to rise to the “level of their incompetence.” If a system is broadly meritocratic, people who perform well will rise up in the pecking order. But eventually, we all hit Peter’s Plateau—the level at which our skills simply aren’t up to the job. We find ourselves in over our head. We’re no longer beating expectations. So, what happens? No more promotions. No more stellar performance. And that’s where lots of people stagnate.
Unfortunately, stagnant people are corruptible people. And the prospect of advancement is a powerful carrot to make people behave properly. When people hit Peter’s Plateau, they lose that carrot and they’re more likely to get bored with their job, which is a dangerous combination. Suddenly, someone who was following the rules while hoping to climb to the top might start to skirt the rules out of increasing frustration.
Rotation helps solve both problems. If variety is the spice of life, then rotation is just the kind of anticorruption paprika we need. If someone still doesn’t find life spicy enough even after rotating around, at least the movement of people across teams and units will ensure that any bad behavior is detected sooner.
This isn’t just an abstract concept dreamed up by social scientists during naps in our ivory-tower armchairs. It’s been tested—both in the real world and in experiments. For example, the German federal government has designated certain areas of the civil service as particularly prone to embezzlement, bribery, or corruption. For those positions, nobody can occupy a given role for more than five years. If an exception to that rule is ever made, the reasons for that exception have to be formally justified in writing. At first glance, it has seemed to work. There’s not much corruption around those positions. But Germany is already a low-corruption country. As a result, it’s hard to isolate cause and effect. Is corruption low because the staff are rule-following Germans working in Germany, or is it because they’re being moved around?
To find out, Christoph Bühren of the University of Kassel decided to conduct an experiment. Participants were put into pairs, with one designated as the public official in a game that provided real payouts. Multiple strategies could be used to get the highest payouts, but bribing other people was one option. To make things more interesting, researchers tweaked the setup. One group in the study had repeated interactions with the same person. Another group had their partners constantly shifted. The results were extraordinary. When the study was run in Germany, bribery happened 32 percent of the time when people were left with the same partner. But when they were working with a different stranger each time, that rate fell to just 13 percent. Repeated interactions made people trust more, which made them more comfortable to launch a secret scheme. Lest we think this effect only works in comparatively clean countries, the study was replicated in China. There, the rates of bribery fell from 41 percent with consistent companions to just 19 percent with rotating strangers.
Rotation isn’t a miracle. But it helps. And it works best when a higher proportion of the people in the organization or political party or police department are already honest and decent. If you’re recruiting better people and aren’t stuck in QWERTY-style autopilot, rotation is more likely to become a virtuous circle. The better people you get into the rotation, the more it becomes an effective tactic at deterring and suppressing malfeasance by those in power. And if everyone is overseen by a random hodgepodge shadow board or a Citizen Assembly selected by sortition, all the better.
Sadly, even these interventions are still not enough. There’s another problem: as we saw when we encountered clever psychopaths who rose up the ranks, the human versions of rotten apples are good at disguising themselves as pristine ones because we rarely look much below the surface. The way we evaluate leaders too often rewards cunning manipulators who appear to be honest and successful. We’re going to need to change that, too.
Lesson 4: Audit Decision-Making Processes, Not Just Results
When I was an undergraduate at Carleton College, in rural Minnesota, an enterprising group of student volunteers decided to start a free bike-sharing program called Yellow Bikes. The idea was heartwarming. People would donate their old junk bikes. Students would repair them and paint them bright yellow. Then, they’d be left around campus, unlocked, so anyone who wanted to ride rather than walk to class would just need to pick up a discarded bike and start pedaling. Despite some close calls with students drunkenly discovering an unfortunate lack of functioning brakes while careening downhill on campus (or so I’ve heard), the program was a raging success. One student even completed the cycling leg of the Carleton Triathlon competition on a rickety yellow bike.
Four years earlier, my brother had told me that his fellow students at Dartmouth College tried something virtually identical. The only difference was that the bikes were painted green. Shortly after the project produced the initial fleet of brightly painted green bikes, a group of students decided it would be fun to build a ramp and launch the bikes, rider and all, into the Connecticut River with a splash. Much merriment was had by all as the fleet of bikes sank to the riverbed.
Two identical initiatives. One success, one failure. If you only evaluated the Green Bikes program, you certainly wouldn’t waste your time replicating it on your campus. The idea was doomed to fail. If you only evaluated the Yellow Bikes program, you’d start spray-painting. The idea was destined to succeed.
Humans are wedded to the false notion that there’s a straight and predictable line between cause and effect when decisions are made. The green bikes ended up in the river because it was a stupid idea. The yellow bikes worked because it was a smart idea. That’s not how it works. The real world is mind-bogglingly complex. Minor variations and flukes can drastically shift outcomes. That causes us to wrongly attribute failure to some excellent ideas while heaping praise on terrible ideas that produced improbable success. The lesson is simple: Don’t always focus on results and outcomes. Instead, scrutinize the decision-making process much more carefully.
This is particularly important for three reasons when it comes to evaluating people in power. First, if you reward someone for a job well done—when their success was due to luck—then you’re more likely to end up with a costly failure from a bad but lucky leader. Second, people who are good at getting into power are also good at creating narratives that cast them in a better light than reality. They’re skilled at making us think they did a good job even when they screwed up. Better scrutiny of decision-making processes can counteract that. And third, good leaders sometimes look bad during selected snapshots in time, even though they’re doing everything right. That can cause us to wrongly jettison good leaders or hang on to bad ones.
An instructive example comes from baseball. In 1989, the Minnesota Twins were a mediocre team, winning just under half of their games. Fans were furious at the team’s leadership, including manager Tom Kelly. The club had just traded Frank Viola, the American League Cy Young Award winner, for three other pitchers. A year later, the Twins’ win-loss record had gotten worse. They ended the 1990 season as the worst team in their division, winning just 74 of their 162 games. The manager, Kelly, found himself on the ropes. Fans and sportswriters started grumbling that it was time for fresh blood. The team’s owner decided to brush off the criticism. He gave Kelly one more chance. But by mid-April of the 1991 season, the Twins looked worse than ever. They started off with two wins and nine losses, including a dire stretch of seven losses in a row. It seemed Kelly would soon be looking for a job in minor league baseball.
Then, in June, something remarkable happened. The Twins won fifteen games in a row, one of the longest winning streaks in baseball history. The pitchers that they’d acquired in that apparent blunder of a trade in 1989 started to pay off. The wins kept coming. By the end of the season, the Twins were in first place. Over the history of professional baseball at that point, 245 teams had ended a season in last place in their division. Zero had ever finished the following season in first place. That is, until the 1991 Minnesota Twins. In October, the Twins completed their turnaround, winning a nail-biting World Series in the seventh and final game against the Atlanta Braves.
What would’ve happened if the team’s owners had caved to the pressure and fired Kelly as a result of two losing seasons? We can’t say for sure, but Kelly’s management was surely a key factor in the Twins march to the 1991 championship. If the team’s owner had just looked at the team’s win-loss record in a snapshot, he might have done something we often do: get rid of good leaders for bad reasons.
To understand why firing Kelly would’ve been a mistake, it’s worth looking at the Twins’ record in context. Baseball teams have vastly different payrolls. In 2019, for example, the Boston Red Sox paid their players a total of $222 million, compared to just $60 million for the Tampa Bay Rays. In other words, Boston had $3.70 to spend for every $1 Tampa Bay spent. Because more money can buy better players, any comparison between two managers has to take payrolls into account. Plus, because even the absolute-worst teams in history usually win at least a third of their games, there’s a floor to poor performance. The worst Major League Baseball team in history, with the world’s worst manager, will still probably win about 54 of the 162 games on the schedule. As a result, statisticians have come up with a much better metric to evaluate performance: How much money did you have to spend per win beyond the 54 wins that even the worst team will have? For example, if a team won 104 games and spent $100 million, it would be $100 million for fifty “extra” wins (104 − 54 = 50). In this example, the team paid $2 million per extra win.
In both 1989 and 1990, when Tom Kelly’s job was in jeopardy, the Minnesota Twins were spending far less per extra win than many other teams. The New York Yankees, for example, were spending twice as much money per win. Kelly was doing a reasonably good job with a meager payroll, but that didn’t show up in the league standings. Kelly’s rebuild of the team in 1989 and 1990 also needed time to work, as it hinged on developing younger players into top-notch talent.III Because the owners were patient, it paid off in a big way with a world championship in 1991. But many owners would’ve fired Kelly after 1990.
Baseball therefore teaches an unexpected lesson for leadership: we often look at the wins and losses rather than evaluating the decisions that produced them. That tunnel vision causes us to wrongly conflate good results with good leadership and bad results with bad leadership. Reality is more nuanced.
This seemingly subtle point matters because many slippery, slimy leaders who rule realms more consequential than baseball diamonds are really skilled at making their results seem impressive. Remember Steve Raucci, the psychopathic janitor from Schenectady? To get a promotion he went to extraordinary lengths to make his predecessor’s energy-saving record seem worse than it was. Raucci even used violent intimidation to obscure his own poor performance. Baseball managers can’t massage their win-loss record, but politicians, CEOs, police officers, and others in positions of authority do frequently juke the stats or manipulate data to create a rosy, but misleading, impression. Some bad leaders are exceptionally good at timing. The worst leaders are all too willing to saddle their successors with impossible challenges that they delayed dealing with, creating the illusion of smooth sailing until the new leader took control. Such manipulations make it even more likely that we’ll reward those who did the wrong thing but managed to get away with it by spin, deception, or gaming the system. To avoid that trap, we must assess the decision-making itself and carefully scrutinize results in proper context.
History is littered with leaders who received undeserved praise because of a good PR campaign. Take, for example, Benito Mussolini. While Il Duce is rightly regarded as a fascist monster, one bit of acclaim has stayed affixed to his legacy, like a lonely beauty mark stubbornly poking out of an authoritarian carbuncle. I’m referring to the adage “He made the trains run on time.” There’s one problem with that statement: he actually didn’t.
Italy’s railroads were in a sorry state after World War I. But most of the investments made for their repair and reform occurred before Mussolini took power. Once he became a dictator, Mussolini focused on vanity infrastructure, creating ornate train stations on rail lines for the country’s elite, while ignoring commuter trains that served the masses. Hundreds of people died in construction projects under Mussolini—and most of the trains still didn’t run on time. For the trains that did run on time, the decisions made by Mussolini’s predecessor played a much-bigger role in making that possible. Nonetheless, the Italian fascist did what so many in power do masterfully: he took credit for decisions made by others. If you only focus on surface-level results without examining the underlying context or the decision-making itself, you’ll end up reinforcing bad behavior rather than deterring it.
The problem is that nobody investigates how a decision was reached when everything turns out well. We have commissions for disasters, not successes. That needs to change. Because chance plays such an enormous role in success or failure, we should also routinely investigate successful outcomes that may have been produced by procedural failures.
For example, the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion in 1986 could’ve been avoided if more attention had been paid to damaged O-rings during cold-weather launches. Instead, these were ignored by too many with the power to fix it precisely because the problem hadn’t resulted in an explosion—yet. All the warning signs were there. The postlaunch reviews were a procedural disaster, in which red flags were ignored and whistleblowers ignored or silenced. But because the shuttle had safely returned to Earth, nobody paid much attention. If the Challenger somehow hadn’t exploded in 1986, it would probably have exploded later. Learning from accidental success is just as important as learning from catastrophic failures. But we, as a species, just don’t usually see it that way.
We’ve already seen how corruptible people seek power and are often better at getting it. These four lessons provide a road map to put better people into positions of authority: recruit smarter; randomly select people to perform oversight; rotate people around more; and audit decision-making processes, not just results. Implement all four strategies, and you’re well on your way to having better people in power. But we’re still only part of the way there. That’s because no matter what we do, some corruptible people will become powerful. So, what can we do to ensure that once people are in charge, they aren’t swayed by the corrosive, corrupting effects of their authority?
I. One team of Japanese researchers has recently disputed this account. They argue that the origins of the QWERTY keyboard was more a response to the needs of quickly transcribing Morse code, but the parable is just as relevant regardless of which version is correct.
II. Galton initially reported this figure incorrectly as 1,207 pounds, and it was only corrected by a review of the evidence in 2014.
III. Furthering the point, baseball managers only have limited say over which players are on the team. Those decisions are often left up to an off-the-field official: the team’s general manager. As a result, we often blame on-field managers for poor performance when they’re working with decisions made by a far less visible leader in the team’s front office.








XI THE WEIGHT OF RESPONSIBILITY
Lesson 5: Create Frequent, Potent Reminders of Responsibility
If you think you’ve ever had a stressful first day on the job, think again.
When British prime ministers take office, they’re often tired, but euphoric. Having spent the previous night celebrating victory, they all arrive at 10 Downing Street smiling and optimistic. Robin Butler’s job was to wipe that smile off their face.
“The prime minister will arrive and have to take up the job after only about two or three hours’ sleep,” Butler tells me. But once at the office, the new leader is hit with a massive pile of papers—appointments to make, official statements to sign, decisions that can’t wait. Among those papers, Butler would place one seemingly innocuous set of documents. Yet, it was a moral land mine, the hardest decision a human can possibly face. Butler had the unenviable task of explaining it.
His explanation would go something like this: The United Kingdom has four nuclear submarines, known colloquially as Trident—named after the nuclear missiles they carry on board. As you read this, one of the four is patrolling the world’s oceans, a hidden behemoth with unimaginable destructive power lurking in the deep. Its onboard payload comprises 6.4 megatons of explosive power, the equivalent of around 430 Hiroshima bombs. If the weapons engineer pulls the trigger—a trigger that’s the modified handle of a red Colt .45 revolver—entire countries can be wiped out in minutes. Once a missile is launched, there’s no recalling it.
For months, the patrolling Trident submarine doesn’t transmit or broadcast any messages. It runs silent, only dangling a long antenna behind it to receive incoming orders. Secrecy is paramount because nobody can be allowed to know the submarine’s location. The reason for that is simple: that submarine is Britain’s nuclear deterrent. If its location is known, a surprise attack on the submarine could knock out that deterrent in an instant, leaving the country vulnerable. As long as its location is unknown, an enemy will fear that any nuclear attack on Britain will prompt orders for a swift retaliation, a fear that’s known as mutually assured destruction. Nuke the UK, and you’ll have good reason to worry that you’ll get nuked right back.
But what would happen if a surprise nuclear attack struck London, quickly eliminating the British government in a single horrible plume of smoke and radiation? Who would give the order to retaliate? That ominous question has been answered with an ingenious—but disturbing—protocol known as the Letters of Last Resort. For several prime ministers, that protocol began with Robin Butler handing them four pieces of paper and four envelopes, one for each of the Trident nuclear submarines.
“I would then explain this ghastly moral problem,” Butler tells me as we sip tea in his Westminster flat. Butler, who is now both a knight and a lord, is tall and imposing, a holdover from his days spent playing competitive rugby in his youth. Despite being in his early eighties, he’s far more active than his snow-white hair might suggest. But when he provided the briefing about the letters, it was the new prime minister’s face that turned white.
Butler’s guidance was straightforward, even though the choice facing the incoming leader wasn’t. The leader was to handwrite instructions for what to do if Britain was attacked with a nuclear weapon and the government ceased to exist. There are no formal rules for what the prime minister must write, but four main options are suggested: retaliate, don’t retaliate, put the submarine under the control of the US Navy, or leave it up to the commander of the submarine to decide what to do. The rub is that the nuclear deterrent only works if Britain’s adversaries believe that the letters contain retaliation orders. If it was known that the letters said not to retaliate, then an enemy could strike without fear of being hit by British nuclear weapons in return.
Butler would explain to the prime ministers that their beyond-the-grave orders must be written in advance, with no knowledge of who attacked Britain, or why. Retaliation could set off a chain reaction that would end life on the planet, a tit for tat with weapons powerful enough to produce nuclear winter, making humans go extinct. Without knowing the context, the prime minister must decide, Should I give orders that, if followed, could eliminate our species? Put yourself in the prime minister’s shoes. What would you do?
“It comes as a shock to the prime minister,” Butler recalls. “But it must be, above everything else, the thing that brings home to them what the weight of their responsibility is.”
It seems that the British government has, quite by accident, designed the ultimate system for reminding those in high office about the burdens of power. From day one, the new prime minister must realize how much his or her decisions can destroy lives—and even end human life altogether. So, how did it actually affect the prime ministers? To find out, I needed to call former prime minister Tony Blair on Zoom.
He popped up on my screen holding a mug—presumably of tea—while wearing a cozy sweater.
“Sorry I’m dressed so casually—it’s lockdown and everything,” he explains.
I ask him what it was like to have the experience of winning the election, moving into 10 Downing Street, and then getting hit by Butler’s bombshell briefing.
“Whereas everyone else was euphoric, I really wasn’t,” Blair says. “I was oppressed by the weight of the responsibility that was descending upon me and very conscious of it—very conscious of the fact that campaigning for office and governing in office are two very different things.”
But, he says, the Letters of Last Resort weren’t nearly as much of a burden as I might have expected. “To be very honest about it, I thought that the likelihood of nuclear conflagration was so remote that… yes, of course, I paid a lot of attention deciding how I drafted the letters,” Blair says, pausing to reflect. “But it didn’t seem to be anything other than an extraordinarily remote possibility, so I can’t say it occupied my thoughts greatly.” However, Blair does say that he got the same “responsibility effect” from other briefings, which hammered home the scale of his duty. He insists he was always aware that when you were making decisions for millions, you needed to always think about those affected as individual people, not statistics.
“I was always very conscious of that distinction,” Blair says. “The French author Georges Duhamel has a character in one of his books that loved humanity in general, it’s just that he hated them in particular.” Blair says he was determined not to behave like that character.
“A lot of my changes and reforms came from frontline visits,” Blair recalls. “I would do one public event and then I would spend several hours, for example, with frontline health-care workers or police officers. That tends to keep you grounded…. The most important thing for a politician is, don’t go into politics unless people interest you. Actual people. Individuals.”
In British politics, Blair is now a lightning rod of controversy, largely because of his decisions related to the Iraq War. But whatever your political views, his insights about what it feels like to be in power are worth considering. For Cold War–era prime ministers, the Letters of Last Resort were probably more sobering because nuclear conflict felt like a real possibility. For Blair, it was frontline visits with ordinary people that gave him pause. That’s a crucial lesson: for most people, constant reminders of how their decisions could affect others can create more self-reflection and therefore improve behavior. It’s not a magic elixir. But it helps.
Wherever power can be abused, it’s crucial to remind those who wield it of their corresponding responsibility. Sometimes, such reminders are created by design, as with the Letters of Last Resort. Other times, you don’t need to design anything. The harrowing reminders are built in. Surgeons, for example, are haunted by patients who died on their operating table. As awful as those experiences are, many surgeons will tell you that they focus the mind in a productive way. There’s no escaping that every scalpel movement matters.
Others are thrust into roles in which the stakes are both obvious and unrelenting. Cornell William Brooks, for example, felt that responsibility when he was president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). It was clear to him that his actions wouldn’t be judged as any other executive’s, but rather as a standard-bearer for an entire group of people—black people—in the United States. “You realize that you’re speaking not just on behalf of yourself,” he told me when I met him in his office at the Harvard Kennedy School. “You are speaking on behalf of people who don’t get a chance to speak. It’s humbling.”
Kim Campbell, the first female prime minister of Canada, told me something similar: “Nobody who looked or sounded like me had ever done that job before. How do you manage the challenge of being seen as appropriately feminine? But at the same time, being appropriately strong and commanding and trustworthy in terms of dealing with crises or difficult situations?” It was constantly on her mind that she was being viewed as a test case—not of her party or of herself—but of having a woman in charge of the country. “I don’t ever see anybody saying that Kim Campbell is an object lesson for why you don’t want a woman as prime minister,” she says. “That would have worried me.”
For pioneers who are the first to occupy a position of authority, or for those who carry an official banner on behalf of a group that has historically faced discrimination, the weight of responsibility doesn’t come as an occasional reminder. It’s a constant. While it’s difficult to get precise data, it’s likely that such heavy burdens do cause people such as Kim Campbell and Cornell William Brooks to insist even more on clean, virtuous leadership. They know it’s not just about themselves.
However, having an intellectual understanding of responsibility will not guarantee a magical translation into good behavior. Take, for example, one of the most amusingly depressing studies ever conducted. In 1973, students who were studying to become priests at Princeton University were asked to meet with researchers to talk about their motivations for taking the cloth. Then, the seminary students were told to prepare a brief talk about the biblical parable of the Good Samaritan, in which two callous people pass by a robbery victim in distress without helping before a Samaritan stops to care for him. After the students had prepared their speeches about the Good Samaritan, they were instructed to go to an adjacent building and give their talk.
Here’s where it gets interesting. A third of the students were told that they had plenty of time to get to the other building. A third were told that they’d make it on time if they went right away. And a third were told that they were running late and needed to rush to the building.
The researchers were being mischievous. On the way to give their Good Samaritan talk, each of the students encountered a stranger in agony in the alleyway between the buildings. The alleyway was so narrow that the students would have to physically step over the suffering man to get past. The stranger in distress was part of the experiment, but the future priests didn’t know that. Sixty percent of the students running early stopped to help. Half of those who were on time stopped. But only 10 percent of the seminary students running late helped the stranger. This was particularly ironic because they were future priests rushing to give a talk about the biblical parable telling them to stop if they encountered a stranger in agony. Reminders of responsibility can work, but other factors can override them.
So, to create better behavior, you have to twin reminders of responsibility with another psychological tweak: show people in positions of authority the costs and consequences of their actions. If those in authority aren’t made deeply uncomfortable by human faces right in front of them from time to time, they’re probably not doing their job right.
Lesson 6: Don’t Let Those in Power See People as Abstractions
Ken Feinberg is the spitting image of a high-powered, high-paid lawyer: immaculately pressed white shirts, shiny silver cuff links, tortoiseshell spectacles. At seventy-six, he looks young for his age, but his bald head shows wrinkles across his brow, as though the agonizing decisions that he’s grappled with for decades have been etched onto his face. He speaks in a booming voice, every word laced with an almost-over-the-top caricature of a Boston accent. When he gets ready to emphasize a point, his voice rises until he is shouting, like the human embodiment of capital letters. Yet, the shouting is no substitute for exactness. Feinberg deploys words like a twenty-first-century weapons-targeting system. This skill proved crucial in a career built around speaking to families who have faced horrific suffering.
For the last thirty-five years, Feinberg has overseen every single major compensation fund in the United States. The Sandy Hook school massacre. The BP oil spill. The Boston Marathon bombing. If a horrific event with a long list of victims takes place in the United States, Ken Feinberg’s phone rings. But the most difficult task he’s been given was, without question, the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund. After 2,977 people were murdered in New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington, DC, Feinberg had to answer one impossible question: What were each of their lives worth?
The fund was enormous, so Feinberg had leeway. In a way, that made the job harder—because not everyone would be equal. He came up with a pragmatic solution: try to figure out how much money the person would’ve earned over the remaining years of life had he or she not been the victim of the September 11 terrorist attacks. That was an uncomfortable method, boiling down people’s worth to their financial earnings and embedding huge disparities into the compensation decisions. But it could solve a key problem: higher-earning victims often had more financial obligations than lower-earning victims, so this would try to minimize the disruptions to families who had already gone through so much. Nobody wanted a widow or widower to default on a mortgage signed under the expectation of a steady paycheck for years to come. Feinberg’s model would make sure that the expected paycheck—or a rough approximation of it—would keep coming indefinitely.
In case the initial financial offer to a family was contested, Feinberg established a system to allow a personal appeal. He’d meet the family in person, hear about their loved one, then decide whether their circumstances warranted an adjustment. “Eight hundred and fifty separate victims and their families came to see me personally,” Feinberg tells me. “The trauma and the horror of 9/11—and the loss of loved ones turned to dust without even a body—I found to be debilitating.” Meeting these people face-to-face was heart-wrenching.
Feinberg couldn’t bring anyone back from the dead. But he could resuscitate a grieving family’s finances. So day after day, month after month, Feinberg listened. I asked him whether he grew numb to the horror stories once it became part of his routine. He immediately objected, “No matter how many times you do it, you’re not any more able to divorce yourself from the emotional overhang of the tragedy. That, you never get over.”
The financial calculations weren’t straightforward either. Young people working low-paid jobs as World Trade Center baristas who were disabled from the attacks could reasonably have expected to earn more later in life. “ ‘Mr. Feinberg,’ ” he recalls many saying to him, “ ‘I had this low-paying job, but I had a contract where I was going to get five times more next year.’ Show me the contract. Show me the documentary evidence. ‘Mr. Feinberg, I’m only earning X, but I just was admitted to Harvard Law School.’ Show me that you were admitted.” If he deemed the assumptions were reasonable, Feinberg would adjust the compensation upward. If they weren’t, he’d turn people down.
Imagine having to tell a grieving mother that her son’s life simply wasn’t worth as much as she said it was, at least in financial terms. Imagine having to look families in the eye and tell them that their lost loved ones’ career dreams and aspirations, their plans for future career advancement and the salary it would entail, just weren’t credible. That was Feinberg’s standard day at the office.
Feinberg was even forced to make decisions that could tear apart families, compounding the horrors of victimhood. One woman came to see him, not to ask for more money, but just to talk to someone about her husband. He was a firefighter who died trying to rescue people from the Twin Towers. She told Feinberg that her husband was the center of her universe, a model husband and a perfect father. She called him “Mr. Mom.” When he wasn’t at the fire station, he was teaching their six-year-old to play baseball, teaching their four-year-old to read, or reading a bedtime story to their two-year-old.
“The only reason I haven’t gone up to the roof of our building and jumped to join him is our three children,” she told Feinberg, through tears. “But without Mr. Mom, my life is over. I don’t care how much money you give me.” Then, she left. The next day, Feinberg’s phone rang. It was a lawyer.
“Mr. Feinberg, did you meet yesterday with the woman with the three kids, six, four, and two? With the dad they called Mr. Mom?”
“Yeah. Terrible.”
“Mr. Feinberg, I want to tell you something. I don’t envy what you have to do. You’ve got a tough job. But she doesn’t know that Mr. Mom had two other kids, five and three by his girlfriend and mistress in Queens, New York. I represent the mistress and the two kids. And I just want you to know, because when you cut your 9/11 check, there’s not three surviving children, there’s five surviving children. But I’m sure you’ll do the right thing.”
Click. The lawyer hung up.
Do you tell the widow? Or do you keep your mouth shut?
“What I ultimately did,” Feinberg recalls, “was I never told them. I made two calculations. I cut one check to his wife as the guardian of the three children, and without her knowledge, I cut a separate check to the girlfriend as the guardian of the two kids. That was it.”
After decades of dealing with those kinds of dilemmas, Feinberg says he’s learned two lessons. The first is that life can unexpectedly change in an instant, so you had better cherish it. But the second lesson—the one we’ll focus on—is something that we don’t normally associate with the cold detachment of lawyers.
“You better be a benevolent despot,” Feinberg insists. “You better be empathetic. You better add to your political and substantive power a healthy dose of empathy and sensitivity. Because without those characteristics, without the perception that you are empathetic and understand the plight of the victim, you’re doomed.”
This insight had a strategic side. Without empathy for the victims, the people getting compensated were less likely to accept the agreed amount, and the victims could be embroiled in court battles for years. But Feinberg also recognized a crucial human side about himself. He sat face-to-face with 850 victims and their families. He saw each family’s pain firsthand. For survivors, he had to look at the disfigurements and scars that they were stuck with forever.
“Unless you have a heart of stone, you’re going to be impacted by the emotional vulnerability and expressions of these people in one-on-one confidential meetings,” Feinberg tells me. “There is a certain degree of human nature that prevents me from thinking I’m Julius Caesar or Alexander the Great. And that’s a check on self-serving aggrandizement.”
In total, over $7 billion has been awarded to roughly thirty thousand victims and their families, mostly based on decisions that Feinberg made. He recognized that he controlled their financial fate. As a result, he went to great lengths to ensure that the people he was affecting weren’t amorphous abstractions. He wanted to picture them, to hear their voices break, to agonize with them, before he reached a decision. If he was going to say no to someone, he was going to do so after looking the person in the eye.
Unfortunately, Feinberg’s insistence on eliminating the abstract nature of decision-making is rare in today’s world. It’s easier than ever before to be a desk monster—someone who damages, destroys, or even ends lives without leaving the comfort of an office chair or seeing the suffering inflicted firsthand. Entire industries exist to divorce uncomfortable decisions from the visual fields of those who make them. These jobs often have euphemistic names such as corporate downsizing specialists or termination consultants. They can save your boss the trouble of feeling a bit of emotional discomfort from firing a longtime employee, outsourcing it to someone else. But why does that matter? What happens when serious harm gets sanitized down to a euphemism and the people who are deciding to inflict pain on others never see it firsthand?

On a crisp, sunny January day in Berkeley, California, I walk past students clutching Nalgene water bottles. One has a backpack emblazoned with slogans opposing war and championing justice for victims of human rights abuses. I pass by the crush of students, make my way through the hallways of the law school building, and knock on the door of the most controversial member of Berkeley’s faculty: John Yoo. He’s wearing a dark suit and tie, in marked contrast with other faculty members, who are typing in their offices in jeans and polo shirts. Yoo welcomes me warmly with a smile. I shake his hand, well aware that many people see the man standing before me not as a law professor, but as a war criminal.
Twenty years earlier, shortly after the September 11 attacks, Yoo, as the deputy assistant attorney general of the United States, was tasked with helping President George W. Bush determine what conduct was and wasn’t lawful. Yoo was young and ambitious, a lawyer in his early thirties who was already advising the president. He’d come to the Bush administration’s attention after writing a series of legal briefs arguing for expansive authority for presidents during periods of crisis. He was, as one law professor later put it, “a true believer.”
On January 9, 2002, Yoo wrote a now-infamous memo, arguing that the Geneva Convention protections—protections that prohibited torture of detainees during conflict—didn’t apply to combatants who were apprehended in Afghanistan. The purpose of the memo was, in part, to ensure that American officials and soldiers wouldn’t be charged with war crimes even if they abused prisoners during interrogations. Yoo, along with a small group of other lawyers and administration officials who called themselves the War Council, were determined to find a legal justification for what they would later euphemistically call “enhanced interrogation.” As a result, they cut out other government lawyers from the decision-making, most likely because those lawyers held the understandable view that international law did, indeed, apply to the United States. Many legal scholars and government attorneys have subsequently argued that Yoo’s legal opinions are far outside the mainstream consensus about executive authority and international law. Whether right or wrong, Yoo’s views were certainly convenient for the White House.
In August 2002, Yoo authored another memo. It green-lighted interrogation techniques that most people would consider torture. Specifically, Yoo’s memo provided legal justification for waterboarding (in which the detainee is given a prolonged sensation of drowning and suffocation), confining prisoners in a tiny box and then pouring live insects in with them to make them panic, and keeping prisoners awake for up to eleven days straight. Some, such as Yoo, argue that those techniques were necessary to stave off future attacks. But subsequent reviews have also shown that some detainees who were tortured by the US government after 9/11 were innocent.
When you meet someone who has grappled with a deeply moral problem with profound consequences for human suffering, you inevitably put yourself in the person’s shoes. What would it be like to have that gnaw at your conscience? So I asked him the obvious question: How had it affected him personally? Had he lost sleep over it?
His response was nonchalant: “No, I don’t think I had any sleeplessness—because as a scholar, I think about these things all the time already. I don’t personally feel a lot of stress about making decisions.”
I pressed him on that answer. I told Yoo that I had made plenty of scholarly arguments, but that I would feel a big difference between stating my opinion in an intellectual debate and issuing a legal opinion that could lead to people being deliberately made to feel as if they’re drowning. Yoo nodded. “It is different, sure. And there are people who I worked with in the government who I think kind of had a breakdown over working on these issues.” But despite the internal struggles raging within his coworkers, Yoo says he didn’t share them.
“I had this view,” Yoo tells me. “With interrogation methods, there was like one through twelve or whatever. So we could stop it at four. Maybe that’s too little. People might criticize us later for being too reluctant to try to protect national security. You go to twelve and people will say we allowed too much. Everything is a trade-off. You can choose whatever line you want in terms of interrogation methods. There’s going to be a benefit and there’s going to be costs to each place you stop.”
Some of you will side with Yoo and applaud a hard decision that aimed to save lives. Others will think he’s a war criminal. But what struck me most wasn’t whether he was right or wrong. It was how he made his arguments. No matter how I pressed Yoo, I got the same detached, analytical answers. He was affable, polite, and thoughtful in his replies—even when I tried to push him. With methodical calm, he outlined the logic of each decision. He has clearly thought deeply about these questions. But at no point did I detect any hint of emotion, or a pause of hesitation.
As I said goodbye and walked back out into the Berkeley sunshine, it dawned on me that torture likely remained an abstraction to Yoo. The answers he sought were in books and briefs, not faraway jail cells. He’d presumably never looked into the eyes of a man who was made to believe that he was drowning. Perhaps Yoo’s staunch legal views wouldn’t have been changed by such experiences. The law, after all, is supposed to be dispassionate, cold, unswayed by emotion. And Yoo’s views are strikingly consistent. A disturbing trip to a black site that used torture might have had no effect on his thinking.
But perhaps a healthy dose of discomfort is precisely what’s needed for people who are making morally uncomfortable decisions. Both Feinberg and Yoo were grappling with the limits of the law in the aftermath of September 11. Feinberg made sure that he looked into the eyes of those who were hurt by his decisions. Yoo never saw them.
These aren’t just anecdotes. It turns out there’s good reason to believe that we’d have a society with fewer callous abuses if we made sure that more CEOs and police officers and politicians followed the Feinberg route rather than the Yoo route.
Bambi, Dehumanization, and Artificial Intelligence
Human relationships are mediated by a concept called psychological distance. Our social lives are a bit like an onion. In the center are your immediate family members—your spouse, your children, your parents and siblings. One layer beyond that is your extended family, then perhaps your friends, then your coworkers, and so on. All of those layers, like an onion, can make you cry if something happens to them (depending on your coworkers). But eventually, once you’ve added enough layers, you start to get to the skin—the bits that are disposable. You won’t give their loss a second thought. One layer beyond that and it’s not even part of the onion any longer. Those people don’t even enter into your thoughts.
Naturally, our onions aren’t all alike. Sentimental types might have a larger onion. Others get to the skin much faster, only being moved by concern for their closest personal relationships.
But whether a given layer matters to us isn’t fixed. It can change over time. As the moral philosopher Peter Singer has written, the story of humans and humanity is one of an “expanding circle.” As babies, our moral universe is small, limited to our parents and perhaps a jealous sibling. But as we develop, we care about more and more people. Singer also argues that the history of our species has been defined by an expanding moral circle. People used to care only about people immediately around them. Now, we can be deeply moved by stories of a tsunami or a terrorist attack halfway around the world with people we’ll never meet or know. So, can you deliberately expand your moral circle or grow your moral onion?
The way that someone is portrayed or framed in our minds can radically change our view of that person or group of people. Americans, for example, often think of Iranians as enemies. But American Christians might feel solidarity with persecuted Iranian Christians. Hollywood directors have long understood the power of such framing by manipulating our sense of psychological distance. When a character dies on-screen, we’re not supposed to react much if we’ve barely learned anything about the person. Anonymity doesn’t move us. The unnamed characters who are mown down in a war scene have limited effect on most of us, even though we implicitly understand that they surely had families and aspirations. Out of sight, out of mind. But when a protagonist dies—a character that we feel we understand, that we’re rooting for and identify with—well, those are the tearjerker moments of cinema. That effect can be so powerful that the death of a deer, such as Bambi’s mom, for example, traumatizes us more than the on-screen deaths of just about every unnamed human victim in an action flick.
Specificity matters. You might have different views about “computer nerds” in general than you do about Vanessa, the violinist from IT who brings sourdough into the office every Monday. Or, you may have different views about “migrants” than you do about José, who plays on your company football team and is a first-generation immigrant. (Indeed, there’s consistent evidence that the places most opposed to immigration tend to have the fewest immigrants.) The more we encounter a person, the less the person becomes a category. As we peel back the layers of people’s personality and their inner life, they move closer to the center of our social and psychological onion. The opposite is true, too. If someone remains an abstraction, it’s much easier to not care about the person.
That insight provides a blueprint that can be used for good or for evil.
According to Yaacov Trope, a psychologist at NYU, psychological distance has four dimensions that determine whether a decision lies within the onion we care about. First, there’s social distance (no, not the dreaded pandemic variety). Social distance refers to how much you identify with the person who will be affected by your behavior. Firing a neighbor who is the dad of your daughter’s best friend is harder than firing someone you’ve never met. Second, there’s temporal, or time, distance. How long of a delay is there between the moment you make a decision and the effects it’s likely to have? The CEO of a chemical company will find it easier to let toxic substances slowly leach into groundwater than to poison someone’s glass of water at a restaurant. Third, there’s spatial distance. It’s easier to harm people who are physically far away than those who are in the same room as us. And fourth and finally, there’s experiential distance. It’s easier to inflict harm on or abuse others if you just have to imagine it, as Yoo did, rather than viscerally feel it, experience it, or watch it.
Warfare provides a particularly instructive example of how psychological distance determines human behavior. Throughout most of human history, warfare has been fixed with regard to three of the four dimensions. Whether it was the Spartans or William the Conqueror at the Battle of Hastings, killing on the battlefield was up close, immediate, and visceral. Jab a spear into someone else’s stomach and there’s no escaping the utter lack of temporal, spatial, or experiential distance. This lack of psychological distance is problematic for generals trying to win battles for one simple reason: plenty of humans have an instinctive aversion to killing.
In the nineteenth century, the French military officer Ardant du Picq found evidence that a significant percentage of French soldiers in the 1860s were deliberately firing their weapons high into the air rather than shooting into the living, breathing human beings across the battlefield. Dave Grossman’s book On Killing provides an overview of this phenomenon throughout history, showing striking evidence that a surprising number of soldiers don’t actually use their weapons during combat. After the Battle of Gettysburg, 90 percent of the 27,574 muskets collected after the battle were either still loaded or had been loaded twice without firing. And when soldiers use their weapons, some are averse to actually shooting someone. In the Vietnam War, it’s estimated that up to fifty thousand bullets were fired for every person killed. Grossman’s work points to police and soldier training that now uses more humanlike targets rather than paper bull’s-eyes to try to better prepare shooters for the real-world shooting of a person. Such small adjustments have been shown to increase firing rates during armed conflict.
However, it’s a lot easier to overcome any trigger-finger hesitations you might have with a disturbing trick: don’t think of the person you’re killing as a human being. Instead, mentally transform the person into a disposable subhuman abstraction. History’s worst atrocities are usually preceded by language that equates human beings with insects, vermin, even objects. Slaves were referred to as stock. Native Americans were called savages. Rwanda’s perpetrators of genocide depicted Tutsi as cockroaches.I Nazis referred to Jews as rats and depicted them on posters as lice.
But even under murderous regimes, visible reminders that targeted groups are, in fact, humans can have a potent effect. One of the only successful acts of resistance to the deportation of Jews under Hitler was the Rosenstrasse protest, in which non-Jewish German women protested the detention of their Jewish husbands. Because the detainees were officially linked to non-Jewish Germans, who were viewed as fully human, the protest worked. The Jewish detainees were eventually released and spared. But in most of the worst acts of human cruelty and abuse, the perpetrators tried to create social distance between themselves and their victims. Unable to change the temporal, spatial, or experiential aspects of killing, the focus remained on devaluing the lives of the “enemy.” It helped overcome the perpetrators’ human instinct, our aversion to killing.
These days, overcoming that aversion is even easier. Innovations in modern warfare have expanded psychological distance. Drone strikes, for example, create more spatial and experiential distance, in which a pilot with a joystick can kill large numbers of people on a video screen thousands of miles away. The sounds, smells, and sights of warfare have been removed. For example, drone pilots who commute to Creech Air Force Base in the Nevada desert have a radically different experience from pilots who land fighter jets on aircraft carriers in the Persian Gulf. After launching a deadly missile at enemy combatants, some Nevada drone pilots would hop in their cars, pick up some milk, and sit down for a family dinner with their kids. Killing, for them, could feel too much like a video game. Even when dehumanization isn’t deliberate, it’s harder to think of people as part of your beloved moral onion if they just look like tiny, faraway specks on a video screen.
Thankfully, few of us will ever kill someone. But understanding the concepts behind these extreme examples of psychological distance can help ensure that powerful people behave better. Whether it’s monstrous managers, embezzling executives, or petty-tyrant immigration officials, tweaking how those in charge experience psychological distance is key to creating a better society.
To see how, let’s focus on spatial distance for a moment. In the past, companies such as the Dutch East India Company—enormous behemoths that sprawled across the globe—were the outliers. Now, small, locally owned and operated companies are the outliers. It’s become routine for executives in Western capitals to make decisions that drop toxic sludge half a world away or drive up the price of lifesaving drugs in the world’s poorest countries without ever setting foot in them. It’s increasingly common to get fired by people who work in a corporate headquarters that you’ve never visited. That should give us cause for concern because our moral inhibitions are lessened as the space between us increases. In a 2017 experiment, participants were asked to operate a machine that killed ladybugs. One cohort was physically in the same room as the machine and could see it, though they controlled it remotely. Another cohort was given the same instructions, but they couldn’t see the machine as it was in another location. Those who were spatially distanced from the machine were willing to kill more ladybugs than those who were in the same room. (Those of you with oversize moral onions will be relieved to know that no ladybugs were actually killed in the experiments. The machine was a convincing fake.)
The ability to feel social distance from the people you harm has also radically expanded in the modern era. In the Stone Age, if you stole some berries from your neighbor, you’d almost always see the victim, and the victim would see you. If you got caught, you’d have to face the consequences or live with the stigma in your community. But nowadays, stealing can be done by taking money from faceless accounts in Excel spreadsheets. Eugene Soltes, in his book on white-collar crime, Why They Do It, points to a series of embezzlers who had no issue lying on paper or on spreadsheets, but fessed up almost immediately when confronted by another human being.
So, it seems obvious that the best way to set up systems of accountability is by minimizing the psychological distance between ruler and ruled. Not so fast. We probably don’t want CEOs of Fortune 500 companies spending every waking moment getting to know each employee, nor is it the best use of time for them to be firing people. Plus, do we want police officers to be playing poker on the weekends with gang members they’re supposed to arrest if they commit a crime? Surely not. That’s a recipe for corruption and favoritism.
Similarly, it’s probably not a great idea for surgeons to be so moved by the humanity of their patients that they’re unable to carve into their bodies with cold, methodical precision. Researchers have found that the brains of physicians are far more adept at being unmoved by the pain of others. There’s also evidence that nurses who humanize their patients too much end up with higher rates of job stress and burnout. Mild dehumanization in health care can act as a necessary coping mechanism. On my brother’s first day of medical school, he had to dissect a cadaver in a class aptly titled Gross Anatomy. Like many aspiring doctors, he found the experience deeply uncomfortable. He asked the professor whether he was supposed to try to think of the person on the dissection table as a piece of flesh or as someone’s grandpa. “Both,” the professor replied.
Psychological distance is therefore a dilemma that can be solved by what social scientists call a Goldilocks solution. Anyone making tough and potentially damaging or deadly decisions needs to have just the right amount of emotional proximity. Get too psychologically close and your judgment will be clouded by inescapable sentimentality. Get too far away and your healthy dose of concern and caution will fly out the window. In many spheres of the modern world, the pendulum has swung too far toward an unhealthy amount of distance. We need more CEOs who take an interest in their employees, more government lawyers who see the human face of their briefs, and more community policing.
In reality, the world is moving in the opposite direction. Computers that use opaque algorithms driven by machine learning are replacing psychologically distant humans, who themselves replaced psychologically close humans. While machine learning and AI have huge potential to improve living standards and create a more just society, they can also create control without accountability.
We’ve now covered how to get better people into power and how to ensure that powerful people behave better. We can go a long way toward making the world a more just place by reminding powerful people of their responsibilities while ensuring that they see others as individuals rather than abstractions. The problem, as any social scientist will tell you, is that the people are only part of the equation. You can give a sobering lesson to a prime minister with the Letters of Last Resort, just as you can show midlevel managers the human costs of their reckless or callous behavior. That’s always worth doing, because human compassion and empathy can be powerful forces for good. But if the underlying systems they work in are broken, even well-intentioned people are still prone to behaving badly. Good people in badly designed systems may still give in to darker impulses.
And there’s yet another uncomfortable truth: plenty of people in positions of authority simply won’t be moved by reminders of responsibility or efforts to ensure that people never become abstractions. Psychopaths, for example, wouldn’t be much affected by the Letters of Last Resort, nor would they particularly care about seeing the faces of their victims. Some would even relish the opportunity to inflict suffering. But it’s not just psychopaths we have to worry about. As we’ve seen, a lot of run-of-the-mill corrupt and corruptible people end up in power—nefarious people who aren’t even trying to do good in the first place but are instead motivated by self-interest, greed, or narcissism.
So, if bad systems are still a problem and corruptible people in power are still a menace, how can we improve systems to stop corruptible people from behaving badly?
I. The Rwanda case is the exception that proves the rule. The genocide was extremely vicious, with ordinary people hacking their neighbors to death with machetes. This extreme physical and psychological closeness is a further testament to just how potent dehumanization can be to overcome that proximity.








XII WATCHED

If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.
—Voltaire

Lesson 7: Watched People Are Nice People
If you were a time traveler deciding when and where to commit a crime spree, one place you wouldn’t want to pick was ninth-century England. The punishments and methods of execution weren’t exactly pleasant (to put it mildly). But the trial itself could be deadly, too. In cases in which there wasn’t enough evidence to determine whether the accused was innocent or guilty, the judgment would be determined by a process known as an ordeal. These rituals relied on a belief in judicium Dei, or judgment of God. The accused would be forced to endure something that would normally produce horrific suffering. For example, in “hot water” ordeals, the alleged criminal would be required to retrieve a ring or a stone from a cauldron filled with boiling water. If that burned the person’s flesh, it was divine proof that the accused was guilty. If a miracle intervened and the flesh was unharmed, God had clearly spoken: the person was innocent. The “hot iron” ordeal, as its name helpfully implies, wasn’t pleasant either. An alleged criminal was forced to carry a red-hot piece of iron precisely nine paces, then the burns (or lack thereof) determined the guilt of the accused.
Such ordeals weren’t exclusive to medieval England. In some bedouin communities, the Bisha’a is used to determine whether a person is lying. The alleged liar is asked to lick a hot metal object, often a spoon. If their tongue is burned, they’re deemed a liar. In medieval Germany, Poland, and Scotland, cruentation was used, in which the corpse of a murder victim was believed to spontaneously bleed if the murderer was brought nearby. In Madagascar, suspected criminals were asked to eat three pieces of chicken skin that were laced with a deadly poison produced by the nuts of the indigenous tangena tree. If they died, they’d be declared a sorcerer and buried in disgrace. During the reign of Queen Ranavalona I in the nineteenth century, one estimate suggests that one out of every fifty people in the population died every year as a result of these ordeals.
If you think these systems are a bit insane, you’re not alone. Toxic nuts, boiled hands, and scalding spoons don’t seem—at least at first glance—to be the ideal foundation for a criminal justice system. But Peter Leeson, an economist at George Mason University, disagrees. To him, ordeals were a bizarre, but perfectly rational, way of figuring out the guilt of the accused whenever you couldn’t gather all the facts and you didn’t have the Anglo-Saxon equivalent of Hercule Poirot or Sherlock Holmes hanging around your village. The logic of these ordeals can help us understand how to stop people in authority from abusing their power.
Leeson doesn’t suggest that God intervened to save the limbs of innocents from boiling water. Rather, he says that the ordeals worked because the accused believed that they would work. More precisely, they provided a mechanism to effectively sort the guilty from the innocent for a simple reason: everyone believed that God was always watching.
Leeson asks us to imagine Frithogar, an Anglo-Saxon farmer accused of stealing an animal from his neighbor. If there isn’t sufficient evidence one way or another, Frithogar may be asked whether he’d be willing to undergo a hot-water ordeal to prove his innocence. If Frithogar is guilty, he’ll believe that God will know of his guilt and punish him accordingly. He’ll therefore expect to get scalded by the boiling water. As a result, Frithogar will insist on paying a fine or avoiding the ordeal at all costs. By resisting the ordeal, he’s snitching on himself. But if Frithogar is innocent, he’ll willingly accept the ordeal, believing that God will also know of his innocence and spare him with a miracle. In a way, it’s a bit like Solomon and the baby, in which the woman willing to give up the baby rather than have it cut in half shows herself to be the true mother. In the face of dire consequences, the truth often comes out.
Remarkably, the innocent Frithogars of medieval England would often get a miracle. Because belief in divine intervention was so widespread, once someone eagerly accepted trial by ordeal, the priest would (probably correctly) believe that person to be innocent. As Leeson explains, “Knowing this, the priest can fix the ordeal to find the correct result. For example, if Frithogar chooses to undergo his ordeal, the ordeal-administering priest can lower the water’s temperature so it does not boil him. Frithogar plunges his arm into the cauldron expecting to be unharmed. His expectation is fulfilled—not by God but by the newly informed priest.” There’s evidence that precisely this rigging of the ordeal trial happened, in which a suspect’s willingness to subject themselves to divine scrutiny caused a priest to spare them. It sorted the guilty from the innocent better than holy boiling water ever could.
Ordeals provide a crucial insight: we behave better when we believe we’re being watched by a force that could punish us. We’re more honest, too, because there’s a greater risk that our lies will be exposed. Crucially, just the threat of punishment is often enough to induce better behavior. But it seems pretty dystopian to imagine that mass surveillance is the solution to society’s woes. So, is there a better way? And what do ordeals or religiosity have to do with stopping police officers from using excessive violence or deterring politicians from lining their pockets while they fleece the country? To find out, we need to think a bit more deeply about the role of religion in human societies.
For thousands of years, our devil within has partly been subdued when humans have feared the watchful gaze of a deity looking down from above. Today, billions believe in a God who will punish us for our sins. That belief is so common that it seems as if it must be a natural human impulse. But it’s not. Back in the Stone Age, people didn’t likely see gods as moral enforcers. As Ara Norenzayan, professor of psychology at the University of British Columbia, explains in his book, Big Gods, the gods of hunter-gatherers “are typically unconcerned about moral transgressions such as theft and exploitation…. Many gods and spirits are not even fully omniscient to be good monitors of moral behavior—they perceive things within villages but not beyond; they may be tricked or manipulated by other rival gods. Religion’s early roots did not have a wide moral scope.” Go back far enough and our ancestors probably weren’t as afraid of divine wrath. That all changed with the arrival of what Norenzayan calls the Big Gods—the gods of major modern faiths that are said to be aware of everything we do and are willing to punish us for our sins.
The world’s major religions are overflowing with reminders that God is watching. Abrahamic religions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) make it clear that nothing can be hidden from Him. Even if no human ever finds out that you stole from the church collection plate or that you had impure thoughts about your neighbor, God knows. Other religions send similar messages to believers. In Tibet and Nepal, Buddha Eyes are dotted around villages. This isn’t a recent innovation. Incans had to worry about the gaze of Viracocha, a god who oversaw the empire. As Norenzayan points out, such divine monitoring dates back even further, as “one of the oldest and most significant deities in ancient Egypt was Horus, the sky god, also known as ‘Horus of Two Eyes.’ ”
Norenzayan argues that the specter of divine surveillance served a useful purpose for society. Because people believed they were being watched, they behaved more virtuously than they would’ve otherwise. Big Gods made people fear being caught well before detectives or investigative journalists existed. Furthermore, because society held a shared belief in the same God or gods, Norenzayan says that religiosity built up social trust. If everyone believes in divine punishment, then a shopkeeper can have more faith that you’ll pay back a debt. Both of you know that you’ll inevitably pay for it—either in this life or the next. Just as nuclear weapons act as a deterrent because of “mutually assured destruction,” religion produces another form of MAD: mutually assured damnation. Shared belief creates social cohesion.
In Norenzayan’s estimation, the Big Gods filled a power vacuum that existed because premodern governments were notoriously weak. Policing didn’t exist. Especially in rural areas, the presence of any government was effectively invisible. The farther out of sight from the palace you were, the less likely you were to feel watched by mortals. This is beautifully captured by a scene in Monty Python and the Holy Grail, featuring an exchange between King Arthur, an unnamed peasant woman, and a dissident peasant named Dennis:

KING ARTHUR: I am Arthur, king of the Britons. Whose castle is that?
PEASANT: King of the who?
KING ARTHUR: The Britons.
PEASANT: Who’re the “Britons”?
KING ARTHUR: Well, we all are. We’re all Britons, and I am your king.
PEASANT: Well, how’d you become king, then?
KING ARTHUR: The Lady of the Lake, her arm clad in the purest shimmering samite, held aloft Excalibur from the bosom of the water, signifying by divine providence that I, Arthur, was to carry Excalibur. That is why I am your king.
DENNIS: Listen. Strange women lying in ponds distributing swords is no basis for a system of government. Supreme executive power derives from a mandate from the masses, not from some farcical aquatic ceremony.

Dennis had a point. Neither he nor the peasant woman would’ve had much to fear from Arthur’s government in their daily lives. The Knights of the Roundtable weren’t gallivanting around in search of common criminals or disloyal peasants. Without government enforcement, something else had to fill the void. Norenzayan argues that Big Gods filled that role—and says that without them, many such societies would’ve descended into far worse chaos and disorder. Who needs Big Brother if you’ve got Horus and Viracocha?
But Norenzayan’s Big Gods argument takes this idea one step further. Not only was a belief in constant divine surveillance helpful for creating a more peaceful society, it also created winners and losers between societies. Religious belief could determine whether any given society died, survived, or thrived.
Specifically, he argues that societies that stuck with the amoral hunter-gatherer-style deities—the ones that couldn’t keep an eye on the people who worshipped them—tended to do worse than societies that felt watched. Without any heavenly deterrent, people cooperated less. Without a shared omniscient deity, they trusted each other less. Endless internal conflict destroyed progress. Those societies fizzled—or got conquered and subsumed by more cooperative ones. (There’s even a scholarly theory, called the supernatural punishment hypothesis, that belief in divine retribution provided an evolutionary edge at the individual level. The theory suggests that those who believed in punishment from above were less likely to behave aggressively in ways that would get them killed or imprisoned, thereby giving them a better chance to have kids. In Darwinian terms, we could call that the “survival of the holiest” hypothesis.)
Norenzayan isn’t the first to argue that supernatural beliefs can create social success. Similar arguments have been advanced by the father of sociology, Max Weber, who suggested that the Protestant devotion to the godliness of hard work created self-perpetuating prosperity.
But if the Big Gods argument is right, then it’s no accident that the overwhelming majority of the world’s population believe in moralizing omniscient gods. Instead, belief in those gods helped create successful societies, leading to a spread of those kinds of religions while others died out. The alternative explanation advanced by believers is that religions thrive or fail based on whether they’re true. Christians believe that Christianity has thrived because it’s the true faith, as do Muslims with Islam, and Jews with Judaism. That’s at odds with Norenzayan’s more functional, pragmatic view of religion, which was perhaps best captured by Voltaire. As he put it, “If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.”
The Big Gods hypothesis has flaws. A notable one is that murder and crime in the Middle Ages were rampant despite near universal fear of God’s retribution. But there’s significant evidence—in the modern era as well—that corroborates Norenzayan’s view that “watched people are nice people.” If he’s right, that’s a crucial insight that can be used to deter abuses of power from those in authority.
So, what does the evidence show? Our impulse to hesitate about bad behavior when we’re being watched begins early. Jared Piazza of the University of Kent in England set up an experiment in which children were left in a room with a tantalizing box and told not to look inside. Some of the children were left alone. Others were supervised by an adult who stayed in the room. But one group of children who were left alone were also told that the invisible force of “Princess Alice” would be checking to make sure they didn’t open the box. The children in that group were then asked whether they believed that Alice was real. Everyone who said they believed in the princess refrained from peeking inside the forbidden box. The disbelieving children mostly opened the box. But even those kids ran their fingers across the chair where she supposedly lurked to verify that she didn’t exist before breaking the rules. They were cautious, just in case.
Remarkably, when the researchers crunched the numbers, they found that the children who said they believed in Princess Alice behaved equally well as those who were in the physical presence of an adult. But abstractions are less effective than physical reminders of a watchful overlord. This explains why parents who found the threat of Santa Claus insufficient to turn their naughty children nice have innovated. Some now place a watchful Elf on a Shelf around Christmastime to extract slightly better behavior from their mischievous children.
Unfortunately, prison-guard abuse won’t end with elves on the concrete shelves of jails, and the fear of divine retribution clearly isn’t enough to stave off bad behavior from politicians and CEOs. But subtle reminders of being watched can nonetheless have potent effects. In one study by Newcastle University in England, people in a common work space were able to take refreshments, but were expected to pay for them using an “honesty box.” In one version of the experiment, the honesty box had a poster above it with a picture of eyes glaring down. In the other version, the poster was just a picture of flowers. When the eyes were there, people gave three times more money than when daffodils were overseeing the box. (Several subsequent researchers haven’t been able to replicate some of these findings, so they’ve claimed that the effects are overstated—and they’re probably right.)
Nonetheless, the power of being watched versus feeling anonymous can also be shown if we return to the dictator game. Imagine you’re paired up with another person. You’re given $6 and told that you can keep all of it, or you can split some of it with the other person. Would your decision about how much to give away be remotely affected by what you were wearing at the time?
Researchers at the University of Toronto set up an experiment to test that question. They randomly altered one small detail about the experiment: some participants wore dark sunglasses; others wore clear eyeglasses. Remarkably, those who had the clear eyeglasses gave away an average of $2.71, compared to just $1.81 for those in dark sunglasses. That’s a substantial difference, shifting behavior from a 55/45 split to a 70/30 division of the cash. The most plausible explanation was that wearing dark sunglasses primed people to feel more anonymous, thereby subconsciously tapping into their darker impulses. Thanks a lot, Ray·Ban.
These experiments point to the possibility that deterring bad behavior can hinge on tiny changes. Perhaps even subtle cues that remind people of being watched can have powerful effects. In one brilliantly designed experiment in Morocco, researchers approached shopkeepers and gave them a choice: either accept a cash gift or reject the cash so that it could be donated to charity instead. The only variation in the experiment was when they were being asked. Some shopkeepers were asked at random times throughout the day. A separate group was approached only while the call to prayer was being blared throughout the city—a visceral audio reminder of a deity above. In the randomized group, 60 percent of shopkeepers were generous (an encouraging finding about human nature)! But in the group that was asked during the call to prayer, all chose the charitable option. This study is particularly intriguing because it deals with both the carrot and the stick: the call to prayer should function as a reminder of the weight of responsibility to do good, but it simultaneously primes people to consider divine punishment when they indulge their bad side.
Still, these findings have limits. The belief in divine punishment from Big Gods may be the decisive factor guiding the behavior of some people in modern society, but it’s certainly not what motivates everyone. Most people aren’t devout enough to be constantly worrying about God as they ponder every bit of potentially devilish behavior, from speeding to stealing office supplies from work (you know who you are). And even if reminders work, it’s not exactly a viable option to constantly pump the call to prayer or biblical hymns into corner offices throughout the headquarters of Fortune 500 companies or into the White House. Plus, even if plastering pictures of eyes throughout offices and police stations had any deterrent effect, it would only work for a little while before people just got used to them.
Thankfully, those impracticalities don’t matter so much because modern governments and employers now provide the surveillance and punishment threats that were previously established by divine retribution and the specter of ordeals. Today’s incarnation of Dennis (Monty Python’s suspiciously well-educated medieval peasant) would know—and fear—the intervention of the police or the IRS or their HR department. That doesn’t affect the fundamental allure of religion in general, which remains strong for billions of people. But it does mean that, for many people, the social deterrence benefit from a divine gaze has been replaced by a mortal one.
There’s evidence that watched people are more likely to behave better. It’s clear that we no longer need to rely exclusively on gods to make people fear being caught and punished for bad behavior. But all these discussions are still a bit too abstract. How do we ensure that oversight will reduce abuses of power in the real world?
Lesson 8: Focus Oversight on the Controllers, Not the Controlled
Every day while commuting to my office, I walk past a corpse. I don’t mean this figuratively. In a glass case at University College London lies the 189-year-old skeleton of Jeremy Bentham, the modern founder of utilitarianism—the philosophy that the most ethical choice is the one that will produce the greatest good for the greatest number of people. Bentham’s body, or what’s left of it, is dressed in his own clothes. Bentham intended for his head to be preserved along with the rest of his body. Some accounts suggest he even carried a set of glass eyes around in his pocket for the final ten years of his life so they’d be conveniently ready to go when he expired. However, when the desiccation took place to fulfill his wishes and preserve his head, it went “disastrously wrong, robbing the head of most of its facial expression, and leaving it decidedly unattractive.” Its shriveled scowl is in the university museum instead, while a far more pleasing wax head sits in the glass case. (The oft-repeated story that Bentham’s body is wheeled in to attend meetings of the College Council is, sadly, a myth, as is the fable that his head was stolen by rival universities and used in a football match.) It’s fitting, however, that Bentham’s corpse now lies in a fully glass box at the center of the University College London Student Centre, visible from all sides. His final resting place has ended up much like a surveillance system that he designed in life: the panopticon.
In 1785, Bentham designed a new kind of prison, aimed at ensuring that prisoners would comply with prison rules with minimal oversight. The idea was simple, sinister, and elegant. The prison would be circular, with cells occupying the circumference. In the center would be a single guard tower, designed to allow the guards to see the prisoners without the prisoners being able to see the guards. As a result, the panopticon would create what Bentham called an “invisible omnipresence,” giving the impression that the guard could be watching at any moment. For the prisoner, however, it would be impossible to tell precisely when the guard was looking, forcing the prisoner to behave constantly. Over time, Bentham argued, the prisoners would simply conform—even without much intervention from the guards. In the idealized version of the panopticon, this would lead to self-reform, an enlightened transformation of the prisoner without the need for barking at prisoners or beating them. (The French philosopher Michel Foucault details the potentially sinister implications of this exercise of power in his book Discipline and Punish.) Bentham’s idea was adopted all across the globe, from Stateville Prison in Illinois to the Round House in Australia and the Panoptico in Colombia. Several prisons still in use today were designed based on Bentham’s principles.
But your office might be, too.
Bentham believed that his idea was “applicable, I think, without exception to all establishments whatsoever, in which within a space not too large to be covered or commanded by buildings, a number of persons are meant to be kept under inspections. No matter how different or even opposite the purpose.” Plenty of companies have agreed with Bentham. They’ve made their offices into twenty-first-century versions of his panopticon prisons—albeit without the guard tower in the middle.
According to one 2014 study, nearly three-quarters of American offices are now designed to be “open plan,” with low or no walls separating work spaces. If you’re going to spend part of your working day on Twitter or chatting on the phone to family or friends, everybody will know—and you’ll know that everyone will know. These office designs remain overwhelmingly popular despite consistent evidence that they have detrimental effects on employees. A 2011 review of a hundred different studies about open-plan offices found that they alienate employees, increase stress, and lower job satisfaction. Moreover, the entire point of the open-plan office was to encourage collaboration. Real-world data show that they do the opposite: there’s 70 percent less social interaction in open-plan offices. Panopticon-style workplaces are great for surveillance, but terrible for the people who occupy them.
Furthermore, with the rise of digital technology, companies have an unprecedented ability to monitor everything about workers. The disturbing cornucopia of surveillance technology in the workplace continues to grow: always-on lapel microphones, microchipped ID badges, chair sensors to determine when you’re at your desk, keystroke monitoring on your computer, software that takes pictures of you at your desk at regular intervals, and technology that routinely screenshots your computer screen to ensure that you’re not looking at recipes when you should be trying to slay the ever-regenerating hydra that is the modern email in-box. Bentham would whistle in appreciation at all of these methods—if his newfound mouth weren’t made of wax.
These dystopian systems are even worse in authoritarian countries. In China, for example, the “social credit system” aims to constantly monitor citizens and punish them for any “inappropriate” behaviors. The system, which currently exists as a series of pilot projects, is already ominous. Thirteen million people have been blacklisted, making it impossible for them to book flights or buy train tickets. In some cities, if you jaywalk, facial-recognition software automatically identifies you. Your face is displayed on a giant billboard to shame you without delay. In other areas, anyone who breaks the rules set by the Communist Party is ostracized digitally, their faces flashed like mug shots to anyone using social media in the area. On the Chinese messaging app WeChat, people in the city of Shijiazhuang who are blacklisted are displayed on a map. The “telescreens” from George Orwell’s imagined surveillance state in 1984 seem quaint and comforting by comparison.
Here’s the problem: Our modern surveillance systems have everything backward. They should be inverted. We’re watching the wrong people. The twenty-first-century panopticon should be turned inside out, so the people in power feel as if they’re constantly being watched instead. When Enron imploded or Bernie Madoff’s pyramid scheme collapsed, it wasn’t because a junior employee stole a few paper clips or spent twenty minutes during the workday watching cat videos on YouTube. It was because those who controlled those junior employees were themselves behaving badly—and with much higher stakes.
According to various estimates, white-collar crime accounts for between $250 billion and $400 billion in losses or damages each year in the United States alone. Add up all the property crimes committed on American streets—burglaries, robberies, thefts, arson—and you’re looking at just over $17 billion in damage, making white-collar crimes roughly fifteen to twenty-five times more costly. Conservative estimates similarly suggest that around three hundred thousand Americans die every year from corporate malfeasance, largely from toxic chemicals, faulty products, exposure to deadly waste or harmful pollutants, and addictive substances provided without rigorous checks. That’s roughly twenty times higher than the number of homicides each year in the United States.
Yet, the most watched people in corporate headquarters are too often those who are least likely to do such serious damage. Corner offices and boardrooms remain opaque. Boardrooms aren’t bugged for audio, board members aren’t tracked with GPS software. CEOs who extol the virtues of open-plan design usually retreat behind closed doors to their corner office. You can be confident that the keystrokes of top-level executives aren’t being logged and scrutinized to ensure that they’re using their time “productively.”
It’s not that we should start implementing such draconian monitoring, but rather that any oversight should start at the top. China’s corrupt Communist Party, not run-of-the-mill jaywalkers, deserves much more scrutiny. Those who control—not those being controlled—are the ones we need to worry about. (Japan provides an interesting example of reorienting a worker’s physical space based on who can actually do damage in a company. Incompetent workers aren’t fired in Japanese corporate culture, but rather become known as madogiwa-zoku, “window watchers.” That’s because they’re moved to the periphery of the office. As they’re demoted to work on insignificant projects, they can look out the window, as nobody need even bother watching them.)
In the modern era, we’ve largely replaced immortal omniscience with mortal surveillance. But today’s watchers are the very people who should feel watched themselves. At least Big Gods are said to watch everyone equally. The world would be a better place if people in power worried more that their every corrupt move was being watched by someone lurking behind every rock and tree—or at least every rock.
That’s a lesson that Anas Aremeyaw Anas has taken literally. As a pioneer of “undercover journalism” in Ghana, Anas has taken things a bit further than most in his profession. He is a master of disguise who uses elaborate costumes to ensure that people in power tell him secrets that they’d never disclose to a journalist. In some instances, he’s even used a disguise to blend into his surroundings—by dressing up as a rock. (The costume is slightly amateurish and makes him look like a human-size lump of sandstone, with two comical eyeholes, but he says the disguise has been effective for blending in.) In addition to the rock, he’s used prosthetic faces to pass as a priest in a Thai prison, as a police officer, as an inmate in a jail, as a patient in a psychiatric hospital, and, on several occasions, as a woman. His professional success relies on his being unrecognizable, so even though the name Anas is famous throughout West Africa, nobody knows what he looks like. Some call him the James Bond of journalism.
“My journalism has three purposes: name, shame, and jail the bad guys,” Anas tells me when I speak to him over Skype. We’ve got our cameras switched on, but I can’t see much. He’s wearing a bucket hat with purple and gold beads draped over his face, obscuring everything but one ear. He tells me that he takes issue with what he calls parachute journalism, in which Western journalists drop into Ghana for a long weekend, interview people in power, write their stories, and take off. Such scrutiny, Anas argues, doesn’t accomplish anything. Everything in Ghana is too opaque. Corruption never gets uncovered that way. “You cannot just fly in from London or the US and spend a week and think that you can uncover the truth better than us,” he says, the beads swaying slightly from his breath as he speaks.
In various disguises, Anas has exposed powerful people across Africa. In Ghana, he broke a major soccer scandal, which involved kickbacks and mass corruption. He also posed undercover for years within the judicial system to get footage of more than thirty judges soliciting bribes. They received cash, goats, and sheep. In return, they allowed hardened criminals—including murderers, rapists, and drug traffickers—to go free. It blew up into one of the biggest scandals in the country’s history and sparked mass reform of the judiciary.
Such work came at a cost. A member of parliament called for Anas to be identified and hanged for his undercover exposés. That MP managed to identify one of Anas’s collaborators, Ahmed Hussein-Suale. The MP publicized Hussein-Suale’s name and photo, along with information about where he lived. On January 16, 2019, Hussein-Suale was driving in a suburb of Ghana’s capital, Accra. As he slowed at an intersection, two men who’d been loitering in the neighborhood for the previous week approached his car. They shot him at point-blank range, the first bullet hitting his neck, the second and third hitting his chest. As he bled to death, the gunmen turned to shocked witnesses, put a finger to their lips, smiled, and left.
That grisly murder only hardened Anas’s resolve. Before his investigations, judges simply figured they could get away with blatant corruption. Politicians felt invincible. Bribes were just part of public life in Ghana. A culture of impunity allowed bad behavior to flourish. Everyone else was being watched, those in power believed, but nobody was watching them. Anas single-handedly flipped that expectation. Ghanaians in power started worrying that anyone around them—even rocks they didn’t notice—could be watching. Because Anas never let anyone see his real face, anyone could be him. That was why it was so powerful.
Anas’s work targeting corrupt top-level officials matters because taking down dishonest bigwigs is one of the only areas where “trickle down” principles actually seem to work. Adam Salisbury—one of my former students—conducted research at the University of Oxford into corruption in West Africa. He found that when a crooked official who led the customs union was taken out of power in Burkina Faso, the people that he previously controlled quickly cleaned up their act. Once underlings stopped getting corrupt cues from the top, they reformed themselves. Decapitating the head seems to work (welcome news for Jeremy Bentham). But Salisbury’s finding adds further support to the notion that if we’re going to put people under the microscope, we should focus our lens on those who are in charge. Their abuses are far more consequential, and cleaning up their act at the top is likely to make more people clean up their act at the bottom. It’s hard to imagine the inverse happening: corrupt judges and CEOs aren’t going to suddenly become squeaky-clean themselves if low-level clerks or secretaries behave better. Yet, because the powerful have positioned themselves as our modern-day Big Gods, we tend to focus our gaze on precisely the wrong people. As Juvenal, the Roman poet, famously put it, “Who will guard the guards themselves?”
Anas’s brand of undercover journalism is pretty rare in Western societies, where it’s deemed ethically dubious. That’s a shame because it can be a potent way of not just exposing wrongdoing but also instilling a healthy bit of worry into those in power who are considering behaving badly. More important, journalism is in decline just about everywhere. Social media and falling advertising revenues online have taken a big chunk out of smaller outlets. As a result, there are just far fewer watchdogs out there. Big newspapers, such as the Washington Post, Guardian, New York Times, and Le Monde, continue to thrive. But the trend toward elite national newspapers while local and regional journalism gets hollowed out is likely to ensure that fewer people fear the fading oversight of a free press. And the more that the press gets vacuumed up by powerful media conglomerates, the less that its gaze will be directed in the right places.
What happens without journalism? Uganda provides an instructive lesson. An audit of education spending in the East African nation discovered that up to $8 out of every $10 allocated to schools was being stolen. The money was funding corruption, not children. Journalists made the story front-page news. They exposed the gap between how much money had originally been allocated—and how much was actually spent on schools. Their reporting had an enormous effect. Soon, only $2 out of every $10 was being stolen. But here’s the crucial bit: embezzlement decreased most in places that were near newspaper distributors. When corrupt officials were being exposed, it only mattered if people could actually read about it. If nobody writes the stories, or nobody reads them, the powerful will develop a sense of impunity and become even worse. Watching needs to be matched up with the right people seeing.
Technology can help, too. India, for example, has developed a clever system for targeting corruption. In India, ordinary people can report extortion via a website called I Paid a Bribe. Whenever a new report is filed anonymously, a new digital pin appears on a map. Over time, it quickly became clear where the crooked hot spots were—allowing reformers to focus on the worst areas.
In Bangalore, one reformer noticed something peculiar: lots and lots of little digital pins on the map at the driving-test center. It immediately clicked: officials who conducted driving tests were allowing bad drivers to pass in exchange for bribes. Not only was that corrupt, it was also dangerous. It would ensure that more people who shouldn’t be on the roads were waved through, so long as they were willing to make their wallets a bit lighter. Researchers discovered a similar problem in New Delhi when they offered a cash reward to any drivers who could quickly pass their driving test. Most passed almost immediately and claimed the reward. But when those who passed were subsequently given a surprise driving test by a squeaky-clean instructor who refused bribes, 74 percent admitted that they hadn’t bothered to learn how to drive. The majority failed the clean test. They’d paid their way onto the roads. The entire system was corrupt.
To stop such deadly kickbacks, the local government in Bangalore changed the driving test so that it was littered with electronic sensors. The entire test was also videotaped. Overnight, bribery in Bangalore’s automotive test centers plummeted. But it didn’t take keystroke logging or GPS monitoring of driving instructors. The problem was pinpointed and fixed with the least invasive oversight necessary to be effective. It worked. We may not all face corrupt driving examiners, but the lessons of that successful intervention are universal.
From Anas’s undercover journalism to driving tests in India to panopticon prisons, it’s clear: you don’t have to constantly watch people. In fact, constantly watching people—especially those who aren’t in power—is a pretty good recipe for a dystopia. But to inch toward a utopia instead, we should make people in authority think that they could be watched at any time. That provides a middle ground that allows us to avoid constant invasions of privacy while still making those in charge think twice before they abuse their power.
Lesson 9: Exploit Randomness to Maximize Deterrence While Minimizing Invasions of Privacy
It’s December 2013, a few days before Christmas, and the sun-baked cobblestones of Madagascar’s capital radiate heat, intensifying the smells of street food and sewage. Our convoy of 4x4s rumbles through the crumbling roads of the city, honking whenever a zebu, or humped cow, walks into the road. With our noisy engines, we’re not exactly a subtle group. To make sure we don’t blend in, our dorky blue canvas vests are emblazoned with ELECTION OBSERVER in bold white letters on the back. We’re the watchers—deployed to ensure that there’s no funny business. It’s election day.
When we arrive, we go through our checklists. Ballot box sealed with its original zip tie? No soldiers intimidating voters? Voters being asked to produce proof of registration? We tick the boxes. Everything seems to be in order. Maybe the election is clean after all. Or maybe, just maybe, the poll workers have been warned that we’re coming. Either way, with the job done, we pile back into our convey and set off down the road. It’s a straight shot to the next polling location, a half mile away. There’s nothing stopping the poll workers at the last location from calling people at the next one and telling them we’re on our way, a warning that gives them precious minutes to hide any fraud.
Sometimes, oversight doesn’t end bad behavior, it just displaces it.
Election monitoring is like a game of Whac-A-Mole. When you suppress vote rigging in one place, it’s more likely to pop up elsewhere. Henchmen are rarely stupid enough to stuff fistfuls of ballots into ballot boxes when foreigners in official vests are watching. But researchers have found that when election observers are deployed, rigging usually spikes in nearby precincts that aren’t monitored. If you’re not careful, election observation can be a waste of time, only creating a minor inconvenience for those who are rigging the election. In that way, badly designed monitoring doesn’t deter, it simply forces innovation. Thankfully, there’s a simple, elegant solution: randomness. Henchmen and crooks have a harder time getting away with fraud if they never know when or where you’ll be watching.
The NYPD can show us how it’s done.

It’s a routine drugs bust in northwest Manhattan. The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has found the drug lair of a dealer. He’s reasonably small fry, a local kingpin at best. But there’s a problem: the warrant to conduct a thorough search of his apartment is being held up. Typical of the paper pushers. So the DEA agents call the NYPD and ask a cop from Washington Heights—a place that used to be known as the “crack capital of America”—to babysit the place. Make sure nobody comes in or out. There’s probably a lot of drugs and plenty of cash inside, they tell the cop. They can’t take the chance that someone in the gang will find out the dealer has been made and try to clean up the mess.
The NYPD cop agrees to babysit the spot. He rolls up to the building, climbs up the stairs to the apartment, and lets himself in. Sure enough, bags of heroin are littered across the place. Then he spots it: $20,000 in cash, tightly wound into fat rolls. He’s alone in the apartment. It’s drug money. Nobody from law enforcement has been inside. Who knows how much money is there? Who’s going to miss it? If the perp complains that some of the rolls have gone missing, it’s the word of someone with a badge against someone with a rap sheet. Everyone knows how that story ends. The cop peels off $6,000, leaving enough so it still looks right. He stuffs the wad of cash under his protective vest and waits for the DEA to arrive with the warrant.
When they arrive, they thank him for his help. He takes off, going about his day as if nothing has happened. His shift ends. But when he tries to go home with his illicit score, he’s arrested.
The “DEA agents” were undercover Internal Affairs cops at NYPD. The bags of “heroin” were actually filled with pancake mix. The “drug lair” was an apartment rented by the city police department. The entire place was wired like Fort Knox, with bugs and cameras capturing every move. The cop, who had been suspected of police corruption and illegal activity, had just failed an integrity test.
“Those tests made it much more difficult—not impossible—but much more difficult to steal,” Charles Campisi tells me. Campisi was the head of the NYPD Internal Affairs Bureau from 1996 through 2014, and he almost single-handedly helped clean up the department. It started small. “We had a policy here that you couldn’t walk into a store and get free coffee,” Campisi says. “It was at the very bottom of the corruption level. But the idea was, if you didn’t start at the bottom, you’d never get to the top.” Such policies were reinforced by integrity tests, or stings—by cops, for cops.
Sometimes the tests were targeted. When Internal Affairs got a tip from either a fellow cop or a member of the public, they’d put the suspected officer under surveillance and give them an easy opportunity to behave badly. They never pressured anyone in uniform to commit a crime, but often manufactured a situation in which a quick and seemingly undetectable payoff was waiting, such as a wallet turned in that was chock-full of cash. Other times, undercover officers posed as crooks. During an interrogation or an arrest, the fake criminals would insult their coworker cops to see if they got rough and used violence. If the cop pocketed the money or threw a punch, they were put in handcuffs.
But Campisi’s most effective innovation was randomizing the integrity tests. After years under his watch, the NYPD had already considerably improved. In 2012, for example, Campisi helped organize 530 integrity tests. There were dozens of procedural failures. But only six cops took the money or stole planted drugs. And here’s the crucial insight that Campisi noticed. If you do five hundred random integrity tests a year, thousands of cops are going to think they’ve been tested. After all, members of the public do turn in wallets, and drug busts often involve cash on tables. There are going to be plenty of false positives, real situations that officers incorrectly believe are staged to test them.
Sure enough, in the late 1990s, one researcher surveyed NYPD officers and asked them whether they’d personally been targeted by an Internal Affairs operation in the past year. Based on the answers, the researcher predicted that about six thousand integrity tests were being carried out each year—twelve times more than the reality. And beyond the cops that personally felt that they’d been targeted, the remainder of the force knew they could be under surveillance at any moment. Any drugs bust or routine traffic stop could be an elaborate test. With that healthy dose of fear, fewer officers skimmed cash or stole drugs or beat up insolent criminals.
The lesson here isn’t to start baiting employees by planting pieces of cake in the break-room fridge with enough hidden cameras to catch the person who snatches it. Nobody wants to live in a society like that, where everyone is under suspicion and social trust is absent. Instead, we should make sure that only people who are in uniquely consequential positions of authority worry about being watched. Constant surveillance for anyone is unhealthy. Constant surveillance for run-of-the-mill workers is downright unacceptable. But randomized integrity testing for those who have plenty of opportunity to cause serious harm is usually justified. That, combined with more robust oversight from nosy journalists such as Anas, can go a long way in deterring the worst avoidable abuses in our societies. Careful scrutiny can play the role that Big Gods played before we developed such robust mortal oversight. But lest we end up creating Orwell’s 1984, any human surveillance should be as limited as possible, target those in power most, and, when feasible, use randomization rather than constant monitoring. We must not sacrifice our freedoms on the altar of deterrence.
Finally, it doesn’t have to be all stick and no carrot. Well-designed randomized systems should encourage good behavior, too. In Sweden, for example, one anti-speeding effort used a two-tier process. As you might expect, those who were speeding were fined. But those who were driving below the speed limit were randomly entered into a lottery. The fines paid by the speeders were used as a prize for random winners from the law-abiding drivers. It punished bad behavior at the same time that it created incentives for good behavior. Just as randomization—sortition—can be useful to select people for power, it can also be a useful tool to hold people in power accountable for their actions. The power of randomness should be used more often in the fight against the corruptible people who too often end up in charge.
Whatever methods we use, we must swing the pendulum back toward watching those in power rather than ordinary workers or citizens. And that’s because of Norenzayan’s simple truth, present from ancient Egypt until today: watched people are nice people.








XIII WAITING FOR CINCINNATUS
Lesson 10: Stop Waiting for Principled Saviors. Make Them Instead
In 458 BC, the Aequi, a tribe from the Apennine Mountains east of Rome, besieged a Roman army. As Livy tells it, only “five mounted men got through the enemies’ outposts and brought to Rome the news that the consul and his army were blockaded.” In the “panic and confusion” that followed, Romans gave in to their Stone Age brains: they sought a strong leader to give them confidence in the face of crisis. They agreed on Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus.
When the Romans approached Cincinnatus, he was plowing his field, fully “intent on his husbandry.” Far removed from the power struggles in the city, he was surprised to find that he’d been named dictator. But he reluctantly agreed to take on the responsibility and to lead the Romans. It was his duty. His term was to last at least six months. Instead, after leading an army and defeating the Aequi in battle, Cincinnatus “resigned on the sixteenth day [of] the dictatorship.” He returned to his farm.
Two decades later, the Romans again called on Cincinnatus. This time, they asked him to see off the threat of a rich populist named Spurius Maelius, who was trying to seize power by buying the support of the population. It was a classic example not just of a scheming power-hungry usurper, but also of the masses being tempted by a would-be demagogue. Cincinnatus saw off the threat. Then, again, he relinquished power. He’d only spent twenty-one days in control.
The legend of Cincinnatus (and some historians suggest it’s more legend than history) offers a crucial and complex parable for humanity. Cincinnatus was revered as an exemplar of leadership, a man who didn’t seek power but grudgingly accepted it to serve others. Perhaps it was because he didn’t want power that he was able to wield it justly. The Greek historian Dionysius of Halicarnassus fawned over Cincinnatus and others who followed his example because “they worked with their own hands, led frugal lives, did not chafe under honorable poverty, and, far from aiming at positions of royal power, actually refused them when offered.” Dionysius lamented how unusual that form of leadership had become, as his contemporaries “follow the very opposite practices in everything.” We can relate.
More than two thousand years after Cincinnatus defeated the Aequi, George Washington became known as the American Cincinnatus. The parallels seemed striking: another patriot-farmer who served his country, was asked to become monarch, and refused after serving two terms as president. These were, it seemed, the exceptions that prove the rule: power attracts the worst people and power corrupts even the best people, but Cincinnatus and George Washington were somehow immune from both effects. They neither sought power nor were worsened by its seductive allure. They weren’t corruptible.
To honor both men, the Society of the Cincinnati was formed in Washingtonian America. Its motto highlighted its ethos of public service: Omnia reliquit servare rempublicam—“He relinquished everything to save the Republic.” George Washington was made the society’s first honorary president. But soon, the society faced criticism. Benjamin Franklin worried that it would create a new American nobility, an “Order of hereditary Knights.” Franklin was concerned by the society’s membership rules, which operated on the principle of primogeniture—meaning the elite would replicate itself, passing membership from father to son. Power would flow not through merit, but through veins. Washington, ever the principled revolutionary, threatened to step down from his post unless the hereditary clause was removed. The society agreed. But when nobody was looking, they reinstated it. To this day, Cincinnati membership is tied to bloodlines. Here was a striking irony: a society dedicated to the legacy of scrupulously relinquishing status to serve others behaved unscrupulously to cling to status while serving themselves. They invoked the name of Cincinnatus, but didn’t live up to it, an all-too-common occurrence.
The lesson is this: we need a better strategy than waiting for a modern-day Cincinnatus to save us. Most of the time, that wait will end in disappointment, our hopes dashed. That’s because too many of our current systems disproportionately attract and then sort corruptible people into power. Once there, power changes them—for the worse. There will be principled exceptions. The world is mostly full of good, decent people. Many are our coaches, our bosses, our neighborhood cops. Nonetheless, a small but influential group of malicious people have inflicted enormous damage with the power they wield. Instead of waiting for our principled saviors to leave their farms, a more realistic goal is to change our systems to make more ordinary people behave like Cincinnatus: answering the call to power rather than seeking it, and relinquishing control rather than relishing its intoxicating effects as it corrupts.
We’ve come a long way. From chimpanzees to CEOs, our evolution—from primate despotism, to bands of hunter-gatherers, to the most sophisticated hierarchies ever created—took hundreds of thousands of years. But in a comparatively short time since, we’ve made a mess of things. Despite enormous progress that’s made the world immeasurably better over the last several centuries, we’re still consistently disappointed by those in charge. It’s why Lord Acton’s aphorism—that power corrupts—is widely accepted as not just true, but obvious. So many people in positions of authority are awful. They don’t have to be. But to fix a problem, first we must understand it.
A psychopathic custodian showed us that people most attracted to power are often those least suited for it. Military madness in local police departments taught us that bad recruitment strategies compound that problem, luring in the most power-hungry among us. An Arizona autocrat who ruled over ninety-nine homes like his personal fiefdom made clear that competition is crucial to keeping such corruptible figures at bay. But even with competition, white guys in ties, children picking ship captains, sneezing dogs, and a Prussian king’s obsession with tall soldiers demonstrated that our Stone Age brains continue to delude us into picking the wrong leaders for the wrong reasons. If we overcome those cognitive biases, solo sippers in Starbucks, double-parking diplomats, and the viceroy of Vermont underscored how much we still need to reform systems if we want to affect the behavior of those in charge. A Thai prime minister who got his hands dirty, a thief who was a lifelong learner, and a doctor who killed people as floodwaters rose each helped explain why power might not corrupt quite as much as we think. But lest we get too optimistic, a cult-leader bioterrorist and badly behaved BMW drivers revealed that Lord Acton’s maxim is, sadly, accurate. Coked-up monkeys, blow-darted baboons, and rapidly aging executives proved how power without a sense of control can cause physiological stress that takes quite a toll on us.
None of these dynamics are set in stone, however. Better people can lead us. We can recruit smarter, use sortition to second-guess powerful people, and improve oversight. We can remind leaders of the weight of their responsibility. We can make them see people as human beings, not abstractions, before the powerful turn them into victims. We can rotate personnel to deter and detect abuse. We can use randomized integrity tests to catch bad apples. And if we’re going to watch people, we can focus on those at the top who do the real damage, not the rank and file.
Yes, there is a better way. And we can make a better world. With concerted effort and the right reforms, we can swing the pendulum back, pushing away corruptible people who seek and abuse power and inviting others to take their place. Then, finally, we can experience what it’s like to live in a society in which the powerful and the incorruptible are one and the same.








ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wrote much of this book while sitting in a portable camping chair that I carried in panniers on my bike to a vast expanse of empty beach on England’s south coast, taking social distancing to absurd extremes during a global pandemic. But a book—and especially a book like this one—is the intellectual opposite of social distancing. It’s the culmination of years and years of an author’s brain being piqued by intriguing ideas proposed by others, seemingly trivial encounters that linger in one’s thoughts for years, and little asides made by smart people in casual conversation. I am indebted to many of those smart people who were kind enough to share their insights about the maddening complexities of power, hierarchy, and status—and to many awful people who told me how they successfully climbed to the top, and why they tore others down.
I’m also indebted to Anthony Mattero, my agent, who always wields his power justly, and who believed in this idea from the beginning. If he were a meerkat, his “move call” would always be worth following. Rick Horgan, my US editor, is a true guru of publishing. Like Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, he has a devoted cult—of grateful authors who have benefitted from his wisdom. I’ve happily joined it. But I’m confident that he will never abuse that authority to poison salad bars with salmonella. Joe Zigmond, my UK editor, steered me away from my boring ideas and made the book much better. I am very happy to have chosen him—and Caspian Dennis, my UK agent—to captain this ship in British waters (a selection based on their smart guidance rather than seeing their faces in a computer simulation). Thanks are also due to the careful attention of Beckett Rueda, Olivia Bernhard, Dan Cuddy, and Steve Boldt.
This book couldn’t have been written without the hospitality and kindness of people who helped me understand broken people and broken systems of power as I conducted research across the globe, including in Madagascar, Thailand, Zambia, Belarus, Côte d’Ivoire, Tunisia, France, Latvia, the United Kingdom, India, Switzerland, the United States, and Togo. And thanks, sort of, to the countless people I don’t admire—violent rebels in West Africa, coup generals in Southeast Asia, corrupt CEOs in Eastern Europe, torturers in North Africa—who helped me understand how they got to where they are today. I hope this book helps block those paths to other similarly corruptible people in the future.
Many thanks also to a small cohort of enthusiastic undergraduates at University College London who gave up part of their summer in lockdown to help me read about hyenas, hierarchies, and homeowners associations: Antoni Mikocki, Daniella Sims, Edu Kenedi, Emilie Cunning, Hannah White, Maria Kareeva, and Tara De Klerk. Consider this my enthusiastic letter of recommendation. Just attach this acknowledgements section in grad school applications or show it to prospective employers. If you’re reading this for that reason, admit them or hire them. They’re phenomenal.
I’m also grateful to several people I interviewed but didn’t directly include in the text. Their ideas percolated through my thinking as I wrote each chapter. To name a few: Ambassador Samantha Power, Shane Bauer, Erica Chenoweth, Marco Villafaña, Laura Kray, Bernardo Zacka, Danni Wang, David Skarbek, Leigh Goodmark, Lord Peter Mandelson, Zoe Billingham, John Tully, Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun, Dane Morriseau, Omar McDoom, Simon Mann, Jean-Francois Bonnefon, Dennis Tourish, and Kristof Titeca.
Finally, the biggest thanks goes to my family. They taught me everything important I know—and that the greatest power of all is to be able to spend time with wonderful people who love you.








ABOUT THE AUTHOR

© SHENG PENG
BRIAN KLAAS grew up in Minnesota, earned his DPhil at Oxford, and is now a professor of global politics at University College London. He is also a weekly columnist for the Washington Post, host of the award-winning Power Corrupts podcast, and frequent guest on national television. Klaas has conducted field research across the globe, interviewing despots, CEOs, torture victims, dissidents, cult leaders, criminals, and everyday power abusers. He has also advised major politicians and organizations including NATO, the European Union, and Amnesty International. You can find him at BrianPKlaas.com and on Twitter @brianklaas.
SimonandSchuster.com
www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Brian-Klaas
   @ScribnerBooks








Notes
Chapter I: Introduction

fortune in silver coins: Roger W. Byard, “The Brutal Events on Houtman Abrolhos following the Wreck of the Batavia in 1629,” Forensic Science, Medicine, and Pathology, 2020.
“spartan as one moved toward the bow”: Mike Dash, Batavia’s Graveyard (New York: Crown, 2002), 82.
personal calamities: Ibid.
“escape Batavia alive”: Ibid., 150. See also E .D. Drake-Brockman, Voyage to Disaster: The Life of Francisco Pelsaert (Sydney: Angus & Robertson, 1963).
“that survived on the island as well”: Mike Dash, author of Batavia’s Graveyard, personal interview, 25 May 2020.
“suchlike adornments”: The Batavia journals, as quoted in Dash, Batavia’s Graveyard, 216.
rest for the night: “Six Tongan Castaways in ‘Ata Island,” Australia Channel 7 documentary, first broadcast in 1966. Available from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHO_RlJxnVI.
seabird blood: Ibid.
collect rainwater: Ibid. See also Rutger Bregman, Humankind: A Hopeful History (London: Bloomsbury, 2020).
simply move apart: Rutger Bregman, “The Real Lord of the Flies: What Happened When Six Boys Were Shipwrecked for 15 Months,” Guardian, 9 May 2020. See also Bregman, Humankind.
“in that humid atmosphere”: Peter Warner, fisherman who rescued the boys, phone interview, 3 June 2020.
“no haircut”: Ibid.
“Perhaps they won’t remember?”: “Six Tongan Castaways in ‘Ata Island.”
sky-high economic growth: World Bank Data, “Madagascar: GDP Growth (Annual %), https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=MG.
“make important decisions”: Marc Ravalomanana, former president of Madagascar, personal interview, 9 May 2016, Antananarivo, Madagascar.
register his candidacy: See Brian Klaas, “A Cosmetic End to Madagascar’s Crisis?,” International Crisis Group, Africa Report No. 218, May 2014.
Air Force Two: “Madagascar : Air Force Two s’envole vers les Etats-Unis,” Radio France Internationale, 23 November 2012.
radio DJ in power: Brian Klaas, “Bullets over Ballots: How Electoral Exclusion Increases the Risk of Coups d’État and Civil Wars” (DPhil thesis, University of Oxford, 2015).
shadows of their former selves: The original Stanford Prison Experiment is outlined in a series of articles, notably Craig Haney, Curtis Banks, and Philip Zimbardo, “Study of Prisoners and Guards in a Simulated Prison,” Naval Research Reviews 9:1–17 (Washington, DC: Office of Naval Research). See also Craig Haney and Philip Zimbardo, “Social Roles and Role-Playing: Observations from the Stanford Prison Study,” in Current Perspectives in Social Psychology, 4th ed., ed. E. P. Hollander and R. G. Hunt (New York: Oxford University Press, 1976), 266–74.
putting on a performance: Ben Blum, “The Lifespan of a Lie,” Medium, 7 June 2018.
audio recording of the experiment’s: Brian Resnick, “The Stanford Prison Experiment Is Based on Lies. Hear Them for Yourself,” Vox, 14 June 2018.
researchers at Western Kentucky University: Thomas Carnahan and Sam McFarland, “Revisiting the Stanford Prison Experiment: Could Participant Self-Selection Have Led to the Cruelty?,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 33 (5) (2007): 603–14.
“empathy and altruism”: Ibid., 608.
researchers in Switzerland: John Antonakis and Olaf Dalgas, “Predicting Elections: Child’s Play!,” Science 323 (5918): (2009): 1183.
nearly identical results: Ibid.
study conducted in Bangalore: Rema Hanna and Shing-Yi Wang, “Dishonesty and Selection into Public Service: Evidence from India,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (3) (2017): 262–90.
similar experiment in Denmark: S. Barfort et al., “Sustaining Honesty in Public Service: The Role of Selection,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11 (4) (2019): 96–123. See also Ray Fisman and Miriam A. Golden, Corruption: What Everyone Needs to Know (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017).

Chapter II: The Evolution of Power

Last Universal Common Ancestor: See M. C. Weiss et al., “The Physiology and Habitat of the Last Universal Common Ancestor,” Nature Microbiology 1 (9) (2016): 1–8.
Chimpanzee-Human Last Common Ancestor: See P. Duda and J. Zrzavý, “Evolution of Life History and Behavior in Hominidae: Towards Phylogenetic Reconstruction of the Chimpanzee-Human Last Common Ancestor,” Journal of Human Evolution 65 (4) (2013): 424–46.
DNA with chimps: R. Waterson, E. Lander, and R. Wilson, “Initial Sequence of the Chimpanzee Genome and Comparison with the Human Genome,” Nature 437 (2005): 69–87.
Chimpanzee Politics: Frans de Waal, Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes (New York: Harper & Row, 1982).
“very much into power”: Frans de Waal, Emory University primatologist, phone interview, 25 March 2020.
“position number three”: Ibid.
1964 study: E. W. Menzel, “Patterns of Responsiveness in Chimpanzees Reared through Infancy under Conditions of Environmental Restriction,” Psychologische Forschung 27 (4) (1964): 337–65. See also W. A. Mason, “Sociability and Social Organization in Monkeys and Apes,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. L. Berkowitz (New York: Academic Press, 1964), 1:277–305.
evolved from our primate ancestors: Katherine S. Pollard, “What Makes Us Different?,” Scientific American, 1 November 2012.
human accelerated region: Ibid.
“lucky” child or an “unlucky” child: K. Hamann et al., “Collaboration Encourages Equal Sharing in Children but Not in Chimpanzees,” Nature 476 (7360) (2011): 328–31.
“learned from their parents”: Michael Tomasello, developmental psychologist at Duke University, email interview, 23 May 2020.
Collaboration was irrelevant: Hamann et al., “Collaboration Encourages Equal Sharing.”
prehistoric way of life: See J. D. Lewis-Williams and M. Biesele, “Eland Hunting Rituals among Northern and Southern San Groups: Striking Similarities,” Africa, 1978, 117–34.
“insulting the meat”: See R. B. Lee and I. DeVore, eds., Kalahari Hunter-Gatherers: Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1976).
“pile of bones?”: Richard B. Lee, “Eating Christmas in the Kalahari,” Natural History, December 1969, 224. See also Christopher Boehm, Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
“make him gentle”: Lee, “Eating Christmas,” 225.
owner of the arrowhead: See Polly Wiessner, “Leveling the Hunter,” in Food and the Status Quest: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, ed. P. Wiessner and W. Schiefenhövel (Oxford: Berghan Books, 1996).
part of our primate legacy: Mark van Vugt, evolutionary psychologist, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, phone interview, 8 May 2020.
“Humans are the only species”: Neil Thomas Roach, “The Evolution of High-Speed Throwing,” Harvard University research summary, https://scholar.harvard.edu/ntroach/evolution-throwing.
evolutionary cosmetic surgery: Neil Thomas Roach, “The Biomechanics and Evolution of High-Speed Throwing” (PhD diss., Harvard University, 2012).
Clacton Spear: L. Allington-Jones, “The Clacton Spear: The Last One Hundred Years,” Archaeological Journal 172 (2) (2015): 273–96.
Green Beret named Richard Flaherty: David Yuzuk, The Giant Killer: American Hero, Mercenary, Spy… The Incredible True Story of the Smallest Man to Serve in the U.S. Military—Green Beret Captain Richard Flaherty (New York: Mission Point Press, 2020).
shot by a toddler: Christopher Ingraham, “American Toddlers Are Still Shooting People on a Weekly Basis This Year,” Washington Post, 29 September 2017.
physical size differences between males and females: Peter Turchin, Ultrasociety: How 10,000 Years of War Made Humans the Greatest Cooperators on Earth (Chaplin, CT: Beresta Books, 2016), 106.
reverse dominance hierarchy: Boehm, Hierarchy in the Forest.
“All men seek to rule”: Ibid., 105.
differentiation within graves: See E. A. Cashdan, “Egalitarianism among Hunters and Gatherers,” American Anthropologist 82 (1) (1980): 116–20.
much more diversity in the structure of prehistoric societies: “Human social organization during the Late Pleistocene: Challenging the nomadic-egalitarian model” by Manvir Singh and Luke Glowacki, 2021.
with regard to the sexes: Some research has argued that hunter-gatherer societies treated women more as equals; other research suggests the opposite. See John D. Speth, “Seasonality, Resource Stress, and Food Sharing in So-Called ‘Egalitarian’ Foraging Societies,” Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 9 (1990): 148–88.
ostracism meant social death: Boehm, Hierarchy in the Forest.
recent study by Spanish researchers: J. Gómez et al., “The Phylogenetic Roots of Human Lethal Violence,” Nature 538 (7624) (2016): 233–37.
cuddly Madagascan lemurs: Ibid.
“problem personalities were males”: Boehm, Hierarchy in the Forest, 7–8; and phone interview with Christopher Boehm, 29 May 2020.
Valentin Turchin: Peter Turchin, scientist/professor at University of Connecticut, phone interview, 7 April 2020.
mathematical logic: This mathematic relationship was identified by Frederick Lanchester, an engineer who was also a pioneer of the British car industry in the early 1900s. The magnified advantage for larger armies with ranged warfare was named Lanchester’s square law.
ironclad rule of history: Turchin, phone interview.
“set themselves up as chiefs”: Ibid.
Neolithic Revolution: See J. L. Weisdorf, “From Foraging to Farming: Explaining the Neolithic Revolution,” Journal of Economic Surveys 19 (4) (2005): 561–86; and Jared Diamond, “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race,” Discover, 1 May 1999.
environmental circumscription: R. L. Carneiro, “A Theory of the Origin of the State: Traditional Theories of State Origins Are Considered and Rejected in Favor of a New Ecological Hypothesis,” Science 169 (3947) (1970): 733–38.
tens of millions: Turchin, Ultrasociety.
10 percent in some of our darkest eras: Gómez et al., “Phylogenetic Roots.”
die at the hands of another human being: Ibid.
“cook food or to burn people”: Turchin, phone interview.

Chapter III: Moths to a Flame

son of a kosher baker: For a discussion of Wald’s life, see Jordan Ellenberg, How Not to Be Wrong (New York: Penguin, 2014).
“frequently things happened”: W. Allan Wallis, “The Statistical Research Group, 1942–1945,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 75 (370) (1980): 322.
Nilgiri Mountains: Oskar Morgenstern, “Abraham Wald, 1902–1950,” Econometrica 19 (4) (1951): 361–67.
designer glasses and bright red lipstick: Marie-France Bokassa, interview, 30 September 2019, Paris, France.
He was coronated: J. H. Crabb, “The Coronation of Emperor Bokassa,” Africa Today 25 (3) (1978): 25–44. See also “The Coronation of Jean-Bedel Bokassa,” BBC World Service, 4 December 2018.
bespoke twelve-foot-tall bronze statue: Brian Tetley, Dark Age: The Political Odyssey of Emperor Bokassa (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s Press, 2002).
Nile crocodiles: Ibid. See also “In Pictures: Bokassa’s Ruined Palace in CAR,” BBC News, 8 February 2014.
served it to visiting dignitaries: Scott Kraft, “Ex-Emperor’s Reign of Terror Relived: Bokassa Trial: Lurid Tales of Cannibalism, Torture,” Los Angeles Times, 15 March 1987.
“you ate human flesh”: “Nostalgia for a Nightmare,” Economist, 25 August 2016.
fraud or drug abuse: Jeremy Luedi, “The Vietnamese Daughters of an African Emperor,” Asia by Africa, 13 May 2018. For more on Bokassa’s family, see also Jay Nordlinger, Children of Monsters (New York: Encounter Books, 2015).
part of the Bokassa brand: Bokassa, interview. See also Marie-France Bokassa, Au château de l’ogre (Paris: Flammarion, 2019).
Minnesota Twin study: R. D. Arvey et al., “The Determinants of Leadership Role Occupancy: Genetic and Personality Factors,” Leadership Quarterly 17 (1) (2006): 1–20.
born to lead or born to follow?: J.-E. De Neve et al., “Born to Lead? A Twin Design and Genetic Association Study of Leadership Role Occupancy,” Leadership Quarterly 24 (1) (2013): 45–60.
baby hyena… leader of the pack: M. L. East et al., “Maternal Effects on Offspring Social Status in Spotted Hyenas,” Behavioral Ecology 20 (3) (2009): 478–83; and K. E. Holekamp and L. Smale, “Dominance Acquisition during Mammalian Social Development: The ‘Inheritance’ of Maternal Rank,” American Zoologist 31 (2) (1991): 306–17.
gene of interest… SLC6A4: M. A. van der Kooij and C. Sandi, “The Genetics of Social Hierarchies,” Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 2 (2015): 52–57.
zebra fish… social status of the father: S. Zajitschek et al., “Paternal Personality and Social Status Influence Offspring Activity in Zebrafish,” BMC Evolutionary Biology 17 (1) (2017): 1–10.
7 percent wanted a top-level leadership position: Nicole Torres, “Most People Don’t Want to Be Managers,” Harvard Business Review, 18 September 2014.
“need for power”: D. C. McClelland, C. Alexander, and E. Marks, “The Need for Power, Stress, Immune Function, and Illness among Male Prisoners,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 91 (1) (1982): 61.
Social Dominance Orientation: F. Pratto et al., “Social Dominance Orientation: A Personality Variable Predicting Social and Political Attitudes,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 67 (4) (1994): 741.
recruiting video on the department’s website: Radley Balko, “Tiny Georgia Police Department Posts Terrifying SWAT Video,” Washington Post, 13 August 2014.
surplus military equipment: C. Delehanty et al., “Militarization and Police Violence: The Case of the 1033 Program,” Research & Politics 4 (2) (2017): 1–7.
Thetford Township, Michigan: Francis X. Donnelly, “Michigan Town’s Feud over Military Gear Gets Ugly,” Detroit News, 17 April 2018. It’s worth noting that the police chief has recently been indicted for embezzlement related to the military-surplus equipment.
amphibious assault boat: Radley Balko, “Overkill: The Rise of Paramilitary Police Raids in America,” CATO Institute, 25 March 2014, 8.
Lebanon, Tennessee: Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai, “Small-Town Cops Pile Up on Useless Military Gear,” Wired, 26 June 2012.
“a bully, a bigot, or a sexual predator”: Helen King, former assistant commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police, interview, 11 February 2020, London, United Kingdom.
Marshall Project: Simone Weichselbaum and Beth Schwartzapfel, “When Warriors Put on the Badge,” Marshall Project, 30 March 2017.
after the military equipment arrived: Delehanty et al., “Militarization and Police Violence.”
“Do you care enough to be a cop?”: “Freeze! NZ Police’s Most Entertaining Recruitment Video, Yet!,” NZPoliceRecruitment, 26 November 2017, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9psILoYmCc.
“We take policing seriously”: Kaye Ryan, deputy chief executive for people, New Zealand police, phone interview, 12 May 2020.
“Hungry Boy”: “Hungry Boy 45 Sec—‘Do You Care Enough to Be a Cop?,’ ” NZPoliceRecruitment, 30 March 2016, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6pz42UqcmzQ.
“just that they come anyway”: Ryan, interview.
applications are up 24 percent: Data for this section was provided by New Zealand police via email, 12 June 2020.
0.8 deaths per year: Freedom of Information request to the New Zealand government, 29 October 2015, https://fyi.org.nz/request/3174/response/10477/attach/html/3/rakete%20emma%2015%2017696%201%20signed%20reply.pdf.html.
1,146 civilians: “The Counted,” Guardian, 2016 data, https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database.
“the Cannon because I hit hard”: Roger Torres, former MMA fighter, email, 5 September 2020.
40 million do: “National and State Statistical Review for 2017,” Community Associations Institute, 2017, https://foundation.caionline.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/2017StatsReview.pdf.
“apathy was rampant”: Roger Torres, phone interview, 13 May 2020.

Chapter IV: The Power Delusion

edition of Cosmopolitan magazine: Mitch Moxley, Apologies to My Censor (New York: Harper Perennial, 2013).
“some kind of ceremony”: Mitch Moxley, journalist, phone interview, 27 April 2020.
“DOLOE & GOB8ANA”: Moxley, Apologies to My Censor, 261.
“looked the oldest”: Moxley, phone interview.
“music band called Traveller”: Alice Yan, “Inside China’s Booming ‘Rent a Foreigner’ Industry,” South China Morning Post, 12 June 2017.
“didn’t speak English”: Ibid.
468 are run by a man: The data in this section, from publicly available sources, was compiled for me by Maria Kareeva.
Alexa and Siri: Christopher Zara, “People Were Asked to Name Women Tech Leaders. They said ‘Alexa’ and ‘Siri,’ ” Fast Company, 20 March 2018.
Snowy Peaks and Vanilla Boys: “Black bosses ‘shut out’ by ‘vanilla boys’ club,’ ” BBC News, 3 February 2021, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-55910874
8 percent of the total: This is from publicly available data, compiled for me by Daniella Sims.
one in four: Data in this section is from “Women in Parliaments,” Inter-Parliamentary Union, https://data.ipu.org/women-ranking?month=10&year=2020.
rubber-stamp his agenda: See Brian Klaas, The Despot’s Accomplice: How the West Is Aiding & Abetting the Decline of Democracy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017).
“have no followers”: Frans de Waal, primatologist at Emory University, phone interview, 25 March 2020.
stotting or pronking: C. D. FitzGibbon and J. H. Fanshawe, “Stotting in Thomson’s Gazelles: An Honest Signal of Condition,” Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 23 (2) (1988): 69–74.
evolved to quickly convey information: See S. R. X. Dall et al., “Information and Its Use by Animals in Evolutionary Ecology,” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 20 (4) (2005): 187–93.
fiddler crab: Simon P. Lailvaux, Leeann T. Reaney, and Patricia R. Y. Backwell, “Dishonest Signalling of Fighting Ability and Multiple Performance Traits in the Fiddler Crab, Uca mjoebergi,” Functional Ecology 23 (2) (2009): 359–66.
power pose: D. R. Carney, A. J. Cuddy, and A. J. Yap, “Power Posing: Brief Nonverbal Displays Affect Neuroendocrine Levels and Risk Tolerance,” Psychological Science 21 (10) (2010): 1363–68.
TED talk: Amy Cuddy, “Your Body Language May Shape Who You Are,” https://www.ted.com/talks/amy_cuddy_your_body_language_may_shape_who_you_are?language=en.
“effects are real”: Maquita Peters, “Power Poses Co-author: ‘I Do Not Believe the Effects Are Real,’ ” NPR Weekend Edition Saturday, 1 October 2016.
other research: See, for example: L. ten Brinke, K. D. Vohs, and D. R. Carney, “Can Ordinary People Detect Deception After All?,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20 (8) (2016): 579–88.
“potlatch” ceremonies: R. Bliege Bird et al., “Signaling Theory, Strategic Interaction, and Symbolic Capital,” Current Anthropology 46 (2) (2005): 221–48.
“conspicuous consumption”: Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (New York: MacMillan, 1899).
money into social capital: A. B. Trigg, “Veblen, Bourdieu, and Conspicuous Consumption,” Journal of Economic Issues 35 (1) (2001): 99–115.
empty their pockets: M. Van Vugt and W. Iredale, “Men Behaving Nicely: Public Goods as Peacock Tails,” British Journal of Psychology 104 (1) (2013): 3–13.
lace became meaningless: See, for example, P. Blumberg, “The Decline and Fall of the Status Symbol: Some Thoughts on Status in a Post-Industrial Society,” Social Problems 21 (4) (1974): 480–98.
life of leisure indoors: Amanda Riley-Jones, “The Evolution of Tanning,” Reader’s Digest, https://www.readersdigest.co.uk/health/health-conditions/the-evolution-of-tanning.
stayed the same size: R. I. Dunbar, “The Social Brain Hypothesis and Its Implications for Social Evolution,” Annals of Human Biology 36 (5) (2009): 562–72. See also R. Giphart and M. van Vugt, Mismatch: How Our Stone Age Brain Deceives Us Every Day (and What We Can Do about It) (London: Hachette, 2018).
“house a Stone Age mind”: Leda Cosmides and John Tooby, “Evolutionary Psychology: A Primer,” UC–Santa Barbara Center for Evolutionary Psychology, 1997, https://www.cep.ucsb.edu/primer.html.
sweet as a carrot: Daniel Lieberman, “Evolution’s Sweet Tooth,” New York Times, 5 June 2012.
“evolutionary mismatch”: N. P. Li, M. van Vugt, and S. M. Colarelli, “The Evolutionary Mismatch Hypothesis: Implications for Psychological Science,” Current Directions in Psychological Science 27 (1) (2018): 38–44.
snakes and spiders: A. Ahuja and M. van Vugt, Selected: Why Some People Lead, Why Others Follow, and Why It Matters (London: Profile Books, 2010).
“an imposing physique”: M. van Vugt and R. Ronay, “The Evolutionary Psychology of Leadership: Theory, Review, and Roadmap,” Organizational Psychology Review 4 (1) (2014): 74–95.
evolutionary leadership theory: Ibid.
“forward in science careers”: Corinne Moss-Racusin, associate professor of psychology at Skidmore College, phone interview, 23 April 2020.
higher potential starting salary: C. A. Moss-Racusin et al., “Science Faculty’s Subtle Gender Biases Favor Male Students,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (41) (2012): 16474–79.
Herland: C. P. Gilman, Herland (1915; repr., New York: Pantheon, 2010).
eager to rule by democratic means: A. H. Eagly and B. T. Johnson, “Gender and Leadership Style: A Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin 108 (2) (1990): 233.
effect of masculinity is magnified: M. van Vugt et al., “Evolution and the Social Psychology of Leadership: The Mismatch Hypothesis,” Leadership at the Crossroads 1 (2008): 267–82. See also Ahuja and van Vugt, Selected.
“in times of war”: Ahuja and van Vugt, Selected, 164.
taller aide was the king: J. M. O’Brien, Alexander the Great: The Invisible Enemy, a Biography (London: Routledge, 2003), 56.
“they are my weakness”: Stephen S. Hall, Size Matters: How Height Affects the Health, Happiness, and Success of Boys—and the Men They Become (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006).
Irish giant on the streets of London: Nancy Mitford, Frederick the Great (1970; repr., London: Vintage, 2011).
long arm span: Ibid.
men of their time: G. Stulp et al., “Tall Claims? Sense and Nonsense about the Importance of Height of US Presidents,” Leadership Quarterly 24 (1) (2013): 159–71.
shorter opponent(s): Ibid.
perceived as more leader-like: N. M. Blaker et al., “The Height Leadership Advantage in Men and Women: Testing Evolutionary Psychology Predictions about the Perceptions of Tall Leaders,” Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 16 (1) (2013): 17–27.
Hajnal Ban: Marissa Calligeros, “Queensland Councillor Has Legs Broken to Gain Height,” Sydney Morning Herald, 29 April 2009.
eighteenth-century Germany: J. Komlos, “Height and Social Status in Eighteenth-Century Germany,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 20 (4) (1990): 607–21.
additional lifetime earnings: A. Case and C. Paxson, “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market Outcomes,” Journal of Political Economy 116 (3) (2008): 499–532. See also N. Persico, A. Postlewaite, and D. Silverman, “The Effect of Adolescent Experience on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height,” Journal of Political Economy 112 (5) (2004): 1019–53.
Manchester United jersey: M. Levine et al., “Identity and Emergency Intervention: How Social Group Membership and Inclusiveness of Group Boundaries Shape Helping Behavior,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 31 (4) (2005): 443–53.
from their own school: See Ahuja and van Vugt, Selected, “Chapter 6: The Mismatch Hypothesis.”
baby-faced defendants: See D. S. Berry and L. Zebrowitz-McArthur, “What’s in a Face? Facial Maturity and the Attribution of Legal Responsibility,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 14 (1) (1988): 23–33; D. S. Berry and L. Z. McArthur, “Some Components and Consequences of a Babyface,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 48 (1985): 312–23; and D. J. Shoemaker, P. R. South, and J. Lowe, “Facial Stereotypes of Deviants and Judgments of Guilt or Innocence,” Social Forces 51 (1973): 427–33.
than less baby-faced black people: R. W. Livingston and N. A. Pearce, “The Teddy-Bear Effect: Does Having a Baby Face Benefit Black Chief Executive Officers?,” Psychological Science 20 (10) (2009): 1229–36.

Chapter V: Petty Tyrants and Psychopaths

“little thermometer”: Rich Agnello, special education teacher in Schenectady, phone interview, 18 March 2020.
“crime against humanity”: Ibid.
“veins on his head throbbing”: “Petty Tyrant,” This American Life, 12 November 2010.
Lou Semione: Steven Cook, “Day 8: Workers Cite Raucci Abuse,” Schenectady Daily Gazette, 11 March 2010.
manipulating the software: “Petty Tyrant,” This American Life.
“fu**ing with you”: Steven Cook, “Day 7: Witnesses Recall Raucci’s Drive for Power in School District,” Schenectady Daily Gazette, 10 March 2010.
“her type”: “Petty Tyrant,” This American Life.
“will be the fixer”: Kathy Garrison, under cross-examination, trial of Steve Raucci, 8 March 2010.
anonymous letter: Anonymous letter to CSEA president Kathy Garrison, undated.
big letters across their house: Steve Cook, “Day 10: At Raucci Trial, Victim Tells of Threats, Damage,” Schenectady Daily Gazette, 16 March 2010.
while on the clock: “Petty Tyrant,” This American Life.
“trucky truck”: Transcript of secret audio recordings of Steve Raucci submitted as evidence in his trial.
The Godfather: Kathleen Moore, “Emails Show How Raucci Complaints Went Nowhere,” Schenectady Daily Gazette, 22 July 2011.
gave him a loan: Cook, “Day 7.”
DNA were on the cigarette: Steven Cook, “DNA Test Links Explosive to Raucci,” Schenectady Daily Gazette, 12 May 2009.
the Peter Pause: Steven Cook, “Friend-Turned-Informant Provided Crucial Evidence in Raucci Case,” Schenectady Daily Gazette, 7 June 2010.
“narcissistic liar”… “sick ego”: Ron Kriss, former Schenectady district employee, email interview, 10 March 2020.
“what Steve did”: Transcript of secret audio recordings of Steve Raucci submitted as evidence in his trial.
“they got a Steve”: Ibid.
the dark triad: D. L. Paulhus and K. M. Williams, “The Dark Triad of Personality: Narcissism, Machiavellianism, and Psychopathy,” Journal of Research in Personality 36 (6) (2002): 556–63.
the Dirty Dozen: P. K. Jonason and G. D. Webster, “The Dirty Dozen: A Concise Measure of the Dark Triad,” Psychological Assessment 22 (2) (2010): 420.
subject isn’t lying: Caoimhe Mcanena, forensic clinical psychologist, phone interview, 24 February 2020.
Myrmarachne melanotarsa: Ed Yong, “Spiders Gather in Groups to Impersonate Ants,” National Geographic, 3 June 2009.
“silken apartments”: Ed Yong, “Spider Mimics Ant to Eat Spiders and Avoid Being Eaten by Spiders,” National Geographic, 1 July 2009.
“Oscar-worthy performance”: Ximena Nelson, “The Spider’s Charade,” Scientific American 311 (6) (December 2014): 86–91.
“can eat spiders”: Yong, “Spider Mimics Ant.”
kicked a dog to death: Kevin Dutton, The Wisdom of Psychopaths (London: Random House, 2012).
manie sans delire: Y. Trichet, “Genèse et évolution de la manie sans délire chez Philippe Pinel. Contribution à l’étude des fondements psychopathologiques de la notion de passage à l’acte,” L’Évolution psychiatrique 79 (2) (2014): 207–24.
theory of mind: M. Dolan and R. Fullam, “Theory of Mind and Mentalizing Ability in Antisocial Personality Disorders with and without Psychopathy,” Psychological Medicine 34 (2004): 1093–102.
“mirror neuron system”: G. Rizzolatti and L. Craighero, “The Mirror-Neuron System,” Annual Review of Neuroscience 27 (2004): 169–92.
smelled something awful: K. Jankowiak-Siuda, K. Rymarczyk, and A. Grabowska, “How We Empathize with Others: A Neurobiological Perspective,” Medical Science Monitor 17 (1) (2011): RA18.
empathy that mimicked that of normal people: H. Meffert et al., “Reduced Spontaneous but Relatively Normal Deliberate Vicarious Representations in Psychopathy,” Brain 136 (8) (2013): 2550–62.
“noninvasive brain stimulation”: Nicholas Cooper, psychologist at University of Essex, phone interview, 20 May 2020. See also C. C. Yang, N. Khalifa, and B. Völlm, “The Effects of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation on Empathy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Psychological Medicine 48 (5) (2018): 737–50.
“snakes in suits”: P. Babiak, R. D. Hare, and T. McLaren, Snakes in Suits: When Psychopaths Go to Work (New York: Regan Books, 2006).
“impression management”: N. Roulin and J. S. Bourdage, “Once an Impression Manager, Always an Impression Manager? Antecedents of Honest and Deceptive Impression Management Use and Variability across Multiple Job Interviews,” Frontiers in Psychology 8 (2017): 29.
climbing the corporate ladder: J. Volmer, I. K. Koch, and A. S. Göritz, “The Bright and Dark Sides of Leaders’ Dark Triad Traits: Effects on Subordinates’ Career Success and Well-Being,” Personality and Individual Differences 101 (2016): 413–18.
professionals from seven companies: P. Babiak, C. S. Neumann, and R. D. Hare, “Corporate Psychopathy: Talking the Walk,” Behavioral Sciences & the Law 28 (2) (2010): 174–93.
one in a hundred people are psychopaths: See G. Morse, “Executive Psychopaths,” Harvard Business Review 82 (10) (2004): 20–21.
“other management position”: Babiak, Neumann, and Hare, “Corporate Psychopathy.”
Japanese researchers… the ultimatum game: T. Osumi and H. Ohira, “The Positive Side of Psychopathy: Emotional Detachment in Psychopathy and Rational Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game,” Personality and Individual Differences 49 (5) (2010): 451–56.
how the world should be: J. B. Vieira et al., “Distinct Neural Activation Patterns Underlie Economic Decisions in High and Low Psychopathy Scorers,” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 9 (8) (2014): 1099–107.
chefs, and civil servants: Dutton, Wisdom of Psychopaths.
region in the United States: Ryan Murphy, “Psychopathy by US State,” SSRN, 26 May 2018, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3185182.
psychopaths are less torn: M. Cima, F. Tonnaer, and M. D. Hauser, “Psychopaths Know Right from Wrong but Don’t Care,” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 5 (1) (2010): 59–67.
“fewer psychopathic traits”: Leanne ten Brinke, psychologist, University of British Columbia, phone interview, 12 February 2020.
101 hedge fund managers: L. ten Brinke, A. Kish, and D. Keltner, “Hedge Fund Managers with Psychopathic Tendencies Make for Worse Investors,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 44 (2) (2018): 214–23.
rotting in a jail cell or executed: See Brian Klaas, The Despot’s Accomplice (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017).
“torn to pieces”: H. M. Lentz, ed., Heads of States and Governments since 1945 (London: Routledge, 2014).
based on irrational emotions: J. J. Ray and J. A. B. Ray, “Some Apparent Advantages of Subclinical Psychopathy,” Journal of Social Psychology 117 (1) (1982): 135–42.
highly stressful situations: Ibid. See also Dutton, Wisdom of Psychopaths.
“move call”: G. E. Gall et al., “As Dusk Falls: Collective Decisions about the Return to Sleeping Sites in Meerkats,” Animal Behaviour 132 (2017): 91–99. See also Elizabeth Preston, “Sneezing Dogs, Dancing Bees: How Animals Vote,” New York Times, 2 March 2020.
wild dogs: Preston, “Sneezing Dogs.”
help humans survive: D. D. Johnson and J. H. Fowler, “The Evolution of Overconfidence,” Nature 477 (7364) (2011): 317–20.
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation: J. Kolev, Y. Fuentes-Medel, and F. Murray, “Is Blinded Review Enough? How Gendered Outcomes Arise Even under Anonymous Evaluation,” National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019, https://www.nber.org/papers/w25759?utm_campaign=ntwh&utm_medium=email&utm_source=ntwg16.

Chapter VI: Bad Systems or Bad People?

various Starbucks locations: T. Talhelm et al., “Large-Scale Psychological Differences within China Explained by Rice versus Wheat Agriculture,” Science 344 (6184) (2014): 603–8. See also Michaeleen Doucleff, “Rice Theory: Why Eastern Cultures Are More Cooperative,” National Public Radio, 8 May 2014.
“chair test”: T. Talhelm, X. Zhang, and S. Oishi, “Moving Chairs in Starbucks: Observational Studies Find Rice-Wheat Cultural Differences in Daily Life in China,” Science Advances 4 (4) (2018).
“holistic” thinker: David Biello, “Does Rice Farming Lead to Collectivist Thinking?,” Scientific American, 12 May 2014.
“fundamental attribution error”: See, for example, S. Maruna and R. E. Mann, “A Fundamental Attribution Error? Rethinking Cognitive Distortions,” Legal and Criminological Psychology 11 (2) (2006): 155–77.
tested in Austria: S. Kaiser, G. Furian, and C. Schlembach, “Aggressive Behaviour in Road Traffic—Findings from Austria,” Transportation Research Procedia, 14 (2016): 4384–92.
150,000 parking tickets: R. Fisman and E. Miguel, “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement: Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” Journal of Political Economy 115 (6) (2007): 1020–48.
Andrea Ichino and Giovanni Maggi: A. Ichino and G. Maggi, “Work Environment and Individual Background: Explaining Regional Shirking Differentials in a Large Italian Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3) (2000): 1057–90.
what is best for the hive: Francis Ratnieks, professor of apiculture at the University of Sussex, phone interview, 1 April 2020.
excess queens lower productivity: F. L. Ratnieks and T. Wenseleers, “Policing Insect Societies,” Science 307 (5706) (2005): 54–56.
“brood comb”: Ibid.
“good of yourself”: Ratnieks, phone interview.
Melipona bees: See T. Wenseleers and F. L. Ratnieks, “Tragedy of the Commons in Melipona Bees,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 271 (2004): S310–12; and T. Wenseleers, A. G. Hart, and F. L. Ratnieks, “When Resistance Is Useless: Policing and the Evolution of Reproductive Acquiescence in Insect Societies,” American Naturalist 164 (6) (2004): E154–67.
policing is ineffective: Ratnieks, phone interview.
the Builder King: Most of the research from this section comes from Adam Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and Heroism in Colonial Africa (London: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1999).
“petit pays, petits gens”: Ibid., 36.
“make her learn”: N. Ascherson, The King Incorporated: Leopold the Second and the Congo (London: Granta Books, 1999).
“African cake”: Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost. See also “Léopold II à Solvyns, 17 Novembre 1877,” in P. van Zuylen, L’échiquier congolais, ou le secret du Roi (Brussels: Dessart, 1959), 43.
sulfur into melted rubber: C. Guise-Richardson, “Redefining Vulcanization: Charles Goodyear, Patents, and Industrial Control, 1834–1865,” Technology and Culture 51 (2) (2010): 357–87.
$200,000 in debt: G. B. Kauffman, “Charles Goodyear (1800–1860), American Inventor, on the Bicentennial of His Birth,” Chemical Educator 6 (1) (2001): 50–54.
coast over bumps in the road: “How Scot John Boyd Dunlop Gave the World the Pneumatic Tyre,” Scotsman, 5 February 2016.
“bicycle boom”: G. A. Tobin, “The Bicycle Boom of the 1890’s: The Development of Private Transportation and the Birth of the Modern Tourist,” Journal of Popular Culture 7 (4) (1974): 838.
E. D. Morel: Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost. See also C. A. Cline, “ED Morel and the Crusade against the Foreign Office,” Journal of Modern History 39 (2) (1967): 126–37.
was peeled off: Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost.
“couple of goats apiece”: Ibid., 161.
twenty human heads: B. B. de Mesquita, “Leopold II and the Selectorate: An Account in Contrast to a Racial Explanation,” Historical Social Research / Historische Sozialforschung, 2007, 203–21.
the blacks are fed by the organizing committee: Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost. See also Joanna Kakissis, “Where ‘Human Zoos’ Once Stood, a Belgian Museum Now Faces Its Colonial Past,” National Public Radio, 26 September 2018.
crimes against humanity: N. Geras, Crimes against Humanity: Birth of a Concept (Manchester, United Kingdom: Manchester University Press, 2013).
$1.1 billion in today’s value: Belgian scholar Jules Marchal, in correspondence with Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost, 277.
world’s worst natural experiment: De Mesquita, “Leopold II and the Selectorate.”
“park bench and a ski instructor”: L. Paul Bremer III, diplomat, interview, 2 February 2020, Vermont.
ten thousand grams of gold: “Bin Laden Said to Offer Gold to Killers,” Associated Press, 7 May 2004.
massive casualties is growing: Report of the National Commission on Terrorism, 6 June 2000, pursuant to Public Law 105-277.
“a big job”: Bremer, interview.
Timberland combat-style boots: L. P. Bremer, My Year in Iraq: The Struggle to Build a Future of Hope (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006).
ran a story about it: Patrick E. Tyler, “New Policy in Iraq to Authorize GI’s to Shoot Looters,” New York Times, 14 May 2003.
Dia Jabar: Valentinas Mite, “Disappointing Some Iraqis, U.S. Says It Won’t Shoot Looters,” Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, 16 May 2003.
“different from what you do in the United States”: Bremer, interview.
told PBS News: “Closure of Shiite Newspaper in Baghdad Sparks Protests,” PBS News, 29 March 2004.
“could make it happen”: Bremer, interview.

Chapter VII: Why It Appears That Power Corrupts

“read these books myself”: J. J. Martin, “Tortured Testimonies,” Acta Histriae 19 (2011): 375–92.
strappado: R. E. Hassner, “The Cost of Torture: Evidence from the Spanish Inquisition,” Security Studies 29 (3) (2020): 1–36.
Mandell Creighton: F. E. de Janösi, “The Correspondence between Lord Acton and Bishop Creighton,” Cambridge Historical Journal 6 (3) (1940): 307–21.
“white gloves”: Sydney E. Ahlstrom, “Lord Acton’s Famous Remark,” New York Times, 13 March 1974.
“almost always bad men”: de Janösi, “Correspondence between Lord Acton.”
“thought you’d be older”: Abhisit Vejjajiva, former prime minister of Thailand, interview, 25 March 2016, Bangkok, Thailand.
“changes to the country”: Ibid.
Tasting, Grumbling: Ian MacKinnon, “Court Rules Thai Prime Minister Must Resign over Cookery Show,” Guardian, 9 September 2008.
“I hope I’ve succeeded”: Abhisit Vejjajiva, interview, 5 November 2019, Bangkok, Thailand.
thousand others were injured: “Descent into Chaos: Thailand’s 2010 Red Shirt Protests and the Government Crackdown,” Human Rights Watch, 2 May 2011.
“three or four hours of sleep”: Abhisit, interview, 5 November 2019.
“live-fire” zones: “Thailand PM Abhisit in Pledge to End Bangkok Protest,” BBC News, 15 May 2010.
murder charges were dropped: “Thailand Ex-PM Abhisit Murder Charge Dismissed,” BBC News, 28 August 2014.
“my time in office”: Abhisit, interview, 5 November 2019.
“bloody civil war”: Major General Werachon Sukondhapatipak, Thai military, interview, 18 December 2014, Bangkok, Thailand.
“govern innocently?”: See M. Walzer, “Political Action: The Problem of Dirty Hands,” Philosophy & Public Affairs 2 (2) (Winter 1973): 160–80.
“often right to do so”: Ibid.
“unprincipled acts”: R. Bellamy, “Dirty Hands and Clean Gloves: Liberal Ideals and Real Politics,” European Journal of Political Theory 9 (4) (2010): 412–30.
put their vessels at risk: “Churchill’s HMAS Sydney Mystery,” Daily Telegraph, 17 November 2011.
“purest man in America”: James Scovel, “Thaddeus Stevens,” Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine, April 1898, 548–50.
“time when I didn’t steal”: Eric Allison, former thief, phone interview, 20 May 2020. All of Allison’s quotes from this section are from this interview.
authoritarian learning: S. G. Hall and T. Ambrosio, “Authoritarian Learning: A Conceptual Overview,” East European Politics 33 (2) (2017): 143–61.
Nikita Khrushchev in a swimming pool: Mike Dash, “Khrushchev in Water Wings: On Mao, Humiliation and the Sino-Soviet Split,” Smithsonian Magazine, 4 May 2012.
disappearing ink: Nic Cheeseman and Brian Klaas, How to Rig an Election (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2018).
“very early in the morning to beat us”: Ibid.
“double bread with meat”: Zack Beauchamp, “Juche, the State Ideology That Makes North Koreans Revere Kim Jong Un, Explained,” Vox, 18 June 2018.
ratcheting effect: C. Crabtree, H. L. Kern, and D. A. Siegel, “Cults of Personality, Preference Falsification, and the Dictator’s Dilemma,” Journal of Theoretical Politics 32 (3) (2020): 409–34.
battlefield injuries were treated: I. Robertson-Steel, “Evolution of Triage Systems,” Emergency Medicine Journal 23 (2) (2006): 154–55.
manually pump air: Sheri Fink, “The Deadly Choices at Memorial,” New York Times, 25 August 2009.
“first for evacuation”: Ibid.
“too many witnesses”: Ibid. See also Sheri Fink, Five Days at Memorial: Life and Death in a Storm-Ravaged Hospital (New York: Atlantic Books, 2013).
“benzodiazepine sedative”: Fink, “Deadly Choices at Memorial.”
“rock and roll?”: Ibid.
“beyond coincidence”: Sheri Fink, “The Deadly Choices at Memorial,” New York Times Magazine, 11 September 2009.
since the 1970s: Dominic Rushe, “Bernard Madoff Fraud ‘Began 20 Years Earlier than Admitted,’ ” Guardian, 18 November 2011.
“my niece even married one”: Brian Ross and Joseph Rhee, “SEC Official Married into Madoff Family,” ABC News, 16 December 2008, https://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/WallStreet/story?id=6471863&page=1.
potential conflict of interest: “Investigation of Failure of the SEC to Uncover Bernard Madoff’s Ponzi Scheme,” public report, US Securities and Exchange Commission, 31 August 2009, https://www.sec.gov/files/oig-509-exec-summary.pdf.
“biggest Ponzi scheme ever”: Ibid.
between 2001 and 2005: See Harry Markopolos, No One Would Listen: A True Financial Thriller (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
Seven million people disappeared: “The IRS’ Case of Missing Children,” Los Angeles Times, 11 December 1989.

Chapter VIII: Power Corrupts

opportunities that most Indians didn’t: See Manbeena Sandhu, Nothing to Lose: The Authorized Biography of Ma Anand Sheela (New Delhi: Harper Collins India, 2020).
“artist of how to live life!”: Sheela Birnstiel, also known as Ma Anand Sheela, email interview, 7 August 2020.
sexual abuse: Win McCormack, “Bhagwan’s Sexism,” New Republic, 12 April 2018. See also Win McCormack, The Rajneesh Chronicles: The True Story of the Cult That Unleashed the First Act of Bioterrorism on US Soil (Portland, OR: Tin House Books, 2010).
“I didn’t know what I was doing”: Ma Anand Sheela, interview, 6 October 2018, Switzerland.
Rancho Rajneesh: Win McCormack, “Range War: The Disciples Come to Antelope,” Oregon Magazine, November 1981.
took over the Antelope city council: See Frances FitzGerald, “Rajneeshpuram,” New Yorker, 15 September 1986.
alfalfa-sprout sandwiches: Ibid.
“very cheap DC-3”: Ma Anand Sheela, phone interview, 12 February 2020.
supplied 90 percent of their food: FitzGerald, “Rajneeshpuram.”
“haven’t learned their lesson”: FitzGerald, “Rajneeshpuram.”
“unbearable stomach pain”: Les Zaitz, “Rajneeshee Leaders Take Revenge on the Dalles’ with Poison, Homeless,” Oregonian, republished 14 April 2011.
“the enlightened master”: Frances FitzGerald, “Rajneeshpuram II,” New Yorker, 29 September 1986.
“samples of sick people”: Barry Sheldahl, former prosecutor, phone interview, 11 October 2018.
pureeing beavers: McCormack, Rajneesh Chronicles.
weaponizing HIV: Ibid.
The Perfect Crime: Ibid.
“have you had a snack?”: Dacher Keltner, psychologist at UC-Berkeley, interview, Berkeley, CA, 27 January 2020.
Power Approach and Inhibition Theory: D. Keltner, D. H. Gruenfeld, and C. Anderson, “Power, Approach, and Inhibition,” Psychological Review 110 (2) (2003): 265.
“I swear more”: Keltner, interview.
“drive through the pedestrian zone”: “Who Gets Power—and Why It Can Corrupt Even the Best of Us,” The Hidden Brain, National Public Radio, 29 June 2018.
“actually the worst”: Ibid.
“disrespectful ways”: D. Keltner, The Power Paradox: How We Gain and Lose Influence (New York: Penguin, 2016).
“biased by our samples”: Keltner, interview.
“outside of the West”: J. Henrich, S. J. Heine, and A. Norenzayan, “The Weirdest People in the World?,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33 (2–3) (2010): 61–83.
one 2015 study: S. Bendahan et al., “Leader Corruption Depends on Power and Testosterone,” Leadership Quarterly 26 (2) (2015): 101–22.
narcissistic abuse: N. L. Mead et al., “Power Increases the Socially Toxic Component of Narcissism among Individuals with High Baseline Testosterone,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 147 (4) (2018): 591.
talapoin monkeys: A. F. Dixson and J. Herbert, “Testosterone, Aggressive Behavior and Dominance Rank in Captive Adult Male Talapoin Monkeys (Miopithecus talapoin),” Physiology & Behavior 18 (3) (1977): 539–43.
illusory control: N. J. Fast et al., “Illusory Control: A Generative Force behind Power’s Far-Reaching Effects,” Psychological Science 20 (4) (2009): 502–8.
2008 experiment: G. A. Van Kleef et al., “Power, Distress, and Compassion: Turning a Blind Eye to the Suffering of Others,” Psychological Science 19 (12) (2008): 1315–22.
master and a slave: See N. Harding, “Reading Leadership through Hegel’s Master/Slave Dialectic: Towards a Theory of the Powerlessness of the Powerful,” Leadership 10 (4) (2014): 391–411.
interrupt others more: See Keltner, Power Paradox, for an overview of research on the corrosive effects of power.

Chapter IX: How Power Changes Your Body

major busts are burned: Kelcie Grega, “What Happens to Drugs, Property and Other Assets Seized by Law Enforcement?,” Las Vegas Sun, 14 February 2020.
“schedule II license”: Dr. Michael Nader, professor of physiology and pharmacology at Wake Forest University, phone interview, 14 May 2020.
work with closely: Ibid.
number of dopamine receptors: See M. A. Nader et al., “PET Imaging of Dopamine D2 Receptors during Chronic Cocaine Self-Administration in Monkeys,” Nature Neuroscience 9 (8) (2006): 1050–56.
not that reinforcing: Nader, phone interview.
dominant monkeys chose food: D. Morgan et al., “Social Dominance in Monkeys: Dopamine D-2 Receptors and Cocaine Self-Administration,” Nature Neuroscience 5 (2) (2002): 169–74.
food over the cocaine: R. W. Gould et al., “Social Status in Monkeys: Effects of Social Confrontation on Brain Function and Cocaine Self-Administration,” Neuropsychopharmacology 42 (5) (2017): 1093–102.
“well taken care of”: Nader, phone interview.
Whitehall II Study: M. G. Marmot et al., “Health Inequalities among British Civil Servants: The Whitehall II Study,” Lancet 337 (8754) (1991): 1387–93.
better than the average or worse: Sir Michael Marmot, professor of epidemiology at University College London, phone interview, 6 May 2020.
the Status Syndrome: See Michael Marmot, The Status Syndrome: How Social Standing Affects Our Health and Longevity (New York, Times Books, 2004).
“explains everything in our data”: Marmot, phone interview.
crucial tool in survival: Robert Sapolsky, Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: The Acclaimed Guide to Stress, Stress-Related Diseases, and Coping (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1998).
when we’re nervous: Robert Sapolsky, “The Physiology and Pathophysiology of Unhappiness,” in Well-Being: Foundations of Hedonic Psychology, ed. D. Kahneman, E. Diener, and N. Schwarz (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1999).
short-term emergency one: See Marmot, Status Syndrome, “Chapter 5: Who’s in Charge?”
“get the hang of it after a while”: Jordan Anderson, doctoral student, Duke University, phone interview, 21 April 2020.
keel over and sleep: Jenny Tung, evolutionary anthropologist and geneticist at Duke University, phone interview, 21 April 2020.
“metaphysics than Locke”: D. L. Cheney and R. M. Seyfarth, Baboon Metaphysics: The Evolution of a Social Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008).
“a little chemical mark”: Tung, phone interview.
birthdays we’ve celebrated: Ibid.
aged much faster: J. Tung et al., “The Costs of Competition: High Social Status Males Experience Accelerated Epigenetic Aging in Wild Baboons,” bioRxiv, 2020, https://www.biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2020/02/24/2020.02.22.961052.full.pdf.
Stanford’s Robert Sapolsky: See R. M. Sapolsky, “The Influence of Social Hierarchy on Primate Health,” Science 308 (5722) (2005): 648–52.
bolstered by a 2011 study: L. R. Gesquiere et al., “Life at the Top: Rank and Stress in Wild Male Baboons,” Science 333 (6040) (2011): 357–60.
Led by Mark Borgschulte: Mark Borgschulte et al., “CEO Stress, Aging, and Death,” working paper, 19 July 2020, https://eml.berkeley.edu/~ulrike/Papers/CEO_Stress.pdf.
“CEO two years younger”: Ibid.
included seventeen countries: A. R. Olenski, M. V. Abola, and A. B. Jena, “Do Heads of Government Age More Quickly? Observational Study Comparing Mortality between Elected Leaders and Runners-Up in National Elections of 17 Countries,” British Medical Journal, 2015, 351.
aged a full year faster: Borgschulte et al., “CEO Stress and Life Expectancy: The Role of Corporate Governance and Financial Distress,” 1 September 2019, https://eml.berkeley.edu/~ulrike/Papers/CEO_Stress_and_Life_Expectancy_20190901.pdf.
squirted into their nose: S. Cohen et al., “Sociability and Susceptibility to the Common Cold,” Psychological Science 14 (5) (2003): 389–95.
is a deadly mix: Ibid.
boosted immune response: N. Snyder-Mackler et al., “Social Status Alters Immune Regulation and Response to Infection in Macaques,” Science 354 (6315) (2016): 1041–45. See also J. Tung et al., “Social Networks Predict Gut Microbiome Composition in Wild Baboons,” eLife 4 (2015): e05224.
frequently groomed: Ibid.

Chapter X: Attracting the Incorruptible

opened the door to see who it was: Brent Hatch, affidavit by police officer in support of complaint, AST Case 10-988830, 17 October 2010. Provided by Kyle Hopkins, journalist at Anchorage Daily News.
remove her jeans: Ibid.
and stealing a car: Kyle Hopkins, “The Village Where Every Cop Has Been Convicted of Domestic Violence,” Anchorage Daily News, 18 July 2019.
from being a police officer: Kyle Hopkins, journalist at Anchorage Daily News, phone interview, 16 April 2020.
felony assault and sexual abuse: Kyle Hopkins, “Cops in One Village Have Been Convicted of 70 Crimes. Here’s What They Had to Say about It,” Anchorage Daily News, 19 July 2019.
“We can’t find anybody else”: Hopkins, “Village Where Every Cop Has Been Convicted.”
Rebel Ideas: Matthew Syed, Rebel Ideas: The Power of Diverse Thinking (London: Hachette, 2019).
“role model effect”: L. Beaman et al., “Female Leadership Raises Aspirations and Educational Attainment for Girls: A Policy Experiment in India,” Science 335 (6068) (2012): 582–86.
Christopher Latham Sholes: Arthur Toye Foulke, Mr. Typewriter: A Biography of Christopher Latham Sholes (Boston: Christopher Publishing House, 1961).
school superintendent in Pennsylvania: Charles Lekberg, “The Tyranny of Qwerty,” Saturday Review of Science 55 (40) (September 30, 1972): 37–40.
fast enough to jam the machines: This is slightly contested. See Jimmy Stamp, “Fact or Fiction? The Legend of the QWERTY Keyboard,” Smithsonian Magazine, 3 May 2013.
Carnegie Mellon University: A. Fisher and J. Margolis, Unlocking the Clubhouse: Women in Computing (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001).
“Whenever you can, count”: Martin Brookes, Extreme Measures: The Dark Visions and Bright Ideas of Francis Galton (London: Bloomsbury, 2004).
“cross-shaped piece of paper”: Jim Holt, “Measure for Measure,” New Yorker, 17 January 2005.
The mean guess: Kenneth F. Wallis, “Revisiting Francis Galton’s Forecasting Competition,” Statistical Science 29 (3) (2014): 420–24.
Wisdom of Crowds: J. Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds (New York: Doubleday, 2004).
Oxford or Cambridge: Author’s own analysis.
slots of the machine: See P. J. Rhodes, “Kleroterion,” The Encyclopedia of Ancient History, 26 October 2012, https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781444338386.wbeah04171.
864 participants in Zurich: J. Berger et al., “How to Prevent Leadership Hubris? Comparing Competitive Selections, Lotteries, and Their Combination,” Leadership Quarterly 31 (5) (2020): 101388.
“really productive and really helpful”: Helen King, former assistant commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police, interview, 11 February 2020, London, England.
cocaine in his washing machine: Max Daly, “The Police Officers Who Sell the Drugs They Seize,” Vice News, 23 March 2017.
“corruption cases will come out”: King, interview.
German federal government: K. Abbink, “Staff Rotation as an Anti-Corruption Policy: An Experimental Study,” European Journal of Political Economy 20 (4) (2004): 887–906.
provided real payouts: C. Bühren, “Staff Rotation as an Anti-Corruption Policy in China and in Germany: An Experimental Comparison,” Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik 240 (1) (2020): 1–18.
245 teams: “1991: From Worst to First,” This Great Game, https://thisgreatgame.com/1991-baseball-history/.
“extra” wins: Baseball writer Doug Pappas came up with an initial formula, which has since been added to, challenged, and written about extensively—in particular in response to Michael Lewis, Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game (New York: W. W. Norton, 2004).
spending far less per extra win: Author’s own analysis, based on data from “1991 MLB Payrolls,” Baseball Cube, http://www.thebaseballcube.com/topics/payrolls/byYear.asp?Y=1991.
before Mussolini took power: David Dudley, “The Problem with Mussolini and His Trains,” Bloomberg, 15 November 2016.
ornate train stations: See Simonetta Falasca-Zamponi, Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini’s Italy (Berkeley, CA: Berkeley University Press, 1997).
O-rings during cold-weather launches: “Challenger: A Rush to Launch,” WJXT, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EA3mLCmUD_4.

Chapter XI: The Weight of Responsibility

“two or three hours’ sleep”: Lord Robin Butler, former private secretary to five prime ministers and member of the House of Lords, interview, 13 June 2019, London, England.
6.4 megatons: Kyle Mizokami, “Great Britain’s Nuclear Weapons Could Easily Destroy Entire Countries,” National Interest, 26 August 2017, https://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/great-britains-nuclear-weapons-could-easily-destroy-entire-22057.
red Colt .45 revolver: Ben Farmer, “Trident: The Man with the Nuclear Button Who Would Fire Britain’s Missiles,” Telegraph, 21 January 2016.
Letters of Last Resort: Peter Hennessy, The Secret State: Preparing for the Worst, 1945–2010 (London: Penguin, 2014).
“ghastly moral problem”: Butler, interview.
“shock to the prime minister”: Ibid.
“lockdown and everything”: Tony Blair, former prime minister of the United Kingdom, interview, 2 October 2020.
“very different things”: Ibid.
“hated them in particular”: Ibid.
“It’s humbling”: Cornell William Brooks, former president of the NAACP and professor at Harvard Kennedy School, interview, 3 February 2020, Cambridge, MA.
“crises or difficult situations?”: Kim Campbell, former prime minister of Canada, phone interview, 6 April 2020.
amusingly depressing studies: J. M. Darley and C. D. Batson, “From Jerusalem to Jericho: A Study of Situational and Dispositional Variables in Helping Behavior,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 27 (1) (1973): 100.
helped the stranger: Ibid.
Ken Feinberg’s phone rings: See Ross Barkan, “Meet Ken Feinberg, the Master of Disasters,” Observer, 9 March 2016.
“came to see me personally”: Ken Feinberg, attorney and compensation-fund czar, phone interview, 2 April 2010.
“Mr. Mom”: Ibid.
“I’m sure you’ll do the right thing”: Ibid., as told by Feinberg.
you’re doomed: Ibid.
“a true believer”: M. P. Scharf, “The Torture Lawyers,” Duke Journal of Comparative & International Law 20 (2009): 389.
didn’t apply to combatants: Andrew Cohen, “The Torture Memos: Ten Years Later,” Atlantic, 6 February 2012.
War Council: J. C. Alexander, “John Yoo’s War Powers,” Law Review and the World. California Law Review 100 (2) (2012): 331–64.
pouring live insects: David Cole, “The Torture Memos: The Case against the Lawyers,” New York Review of Books, 8 October 2009.
“stress about making decisions”: John Yoo, professor at UC-Berkeley law school and former Bush administration lawyer, interview, 28 January 2020, Berkeley, CA.
“costs to each place you stop”: Ibid.
moral philosopher Peter Singer: Peter Singer, The Expanding Circle (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981).
psychological distance has four dimensions: Y. Trope and N. Liberman, “Construal-Level Theory of Psychological Distance,” Psychological Review 117 (2) (2010): 440.
Ardant du Picq: Ardant du Picq, Battle Studies: Ancient and Modern Battle, Project Gutenberg, https://www.gutenberg.org/files/7294/7294-h/7294-h.htm.
On Killing: David Grossman, On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society (1996; repr., New York: Back Bay Books, 2009).
twice without firing: Ibid.
fifty thousand bullets were fired: N. Sharkey, “Killing Made Easy: From Joysticks to Politics,” in Robot Ethics: The Ethical and Social Implications of Robotics, ed. Patrick Lin, Keith Abney, and George A. Bekey (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012), 111–28.
Creech Air Force Base: James Dao, “Drone Pilots Are Found to Get Stress Disorders Much as Those in Combat Do,” New York Times, 22 February 2013.
dinner with their kids: “The US Air Force’s Commuter Drone Warriors,” BBC News, 8 January 2017.
willing to kill more ladybugs: A. M. Rutchick et al., “Technologically Facilitated Remoteness Increases Killing Behavior,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 73 (2017): 147–50.
unmoved by the pain of others: J. Decety, C. Y. Yang, and Y. Cheng, “Physicians Down-Regulate Their Pain Empathy Response: An Event-Related Brain Potential Study,” Neuroimage 50 (4) (2010): 1676–82.
job stress and burnout: E. Trifiletti et al., “Patients Are Not Fully Human: A Nurse’s Coping Response to Stress,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 44 (12) (2014): 768–77.

Chapter XII: Watched

“hot water” ordeals: P. T. Leeson, “Ordeals,” Journal of Law and Economics 55 (3) (2012): 691–714.
often a spoon: Sonia Farid, “Licking Hot Metal Spoons to Expose Lies: Egypt’s Oldest Tribal Judicial System,” Al Arabiya, 24 September 2018.
cruentation: R. P. Brittain, “Cruentation: In Legal Medicine and in Literature,” Medical History 9 (1) (1965): 82–88.
tangena tree: G. L. Robb, “The Ordeal Poisons of Madagascar and Africa,” Botanical Museum Leaflets (Harvard University) 17 (10) (1957): 265–316.
died every year: See Gwyn Campbell, “The State and Pre-colonial Demographic History: The Case of Nineteenth Century Madagascar,” Journal of African History 23 (3) (October 1991): 415–45.
asks us to imagine Frithogar: Leeson, “Ordeals.”
newly informed priest: Ibid.
“wide moral scope”: Ara Norenzayan, Big Gods: How Religion Transformed Cooperation and Conflict (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2013).
“ ‘Horus of Two Eyes’ ”: Ibid.
supernatural punishment hypothesis: See D. Johnson and J. Bering, “Hand of God, Mind of Man: Punishment and Cognition in the Evolution of Cooperation,” Evolutionary Psychology 4 (1) (2006).
told not to look inside: J. Piazza, J. M. Bering, and G. Ingram, “Princess Alice Is Watching You: Children’s Belief in an Invisible Person Inhibits Cheating,” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 109 (3) (2011): 311–20.
overseeing the box: M. Bateson, D. Nettle, and G. Roberts, “Cues of Being Watched Enhance Cooperation in a Real-World Setting,” Biology Letters 2 (3) (2006): 412–14.
the effects are overstated: S. B. Northover et al., “Artificial Surveillance Cues Do Not Increase Generosity: Two Meta-Analyses,” Evolution and Human Behavior 38 (1) (2017): 144–53.
Researchers at the University of Toronto: C. B. Zhong, V. K. Bohns, and F. Gino, “Good Lamps Are the Best Police: Darkness Increases Dishonesty and Self-Interested Behavior,” Psychological Science 21 (3) (2010): 311–14. See also Alice Robb, “Sunglasses Make You Less Generous,” New Republic, 26 March 2014.
chose the charitable option: F. Lambarraa and G. Riener, “On the Norms of Charitable Giving in Islam: Two Field Experiments in Morocco,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 118 (2015): 69–84. See also Norenzayan, Big Gods.
Bentham’s body: See C. F. A. Marmoy, “The ‘Auto-Icon’ of Jeremy Bentham at University College London,” Medical History 2 (1958): 77–86; and “Fake News: Demystifying Jeremy Bentham,” University College London, https://www.ucl.ac.uk/culture/projects/fake-news.
“decidedly unattractive”: “Auto-Icon,” University College London, https://www.ucl.ac.uk/bentham-project/who-was-jeremy-bentham/auto-icon.
“invisible omnipresence”: M. Galič, T. Timan, and B. J. Koops, “Bentham, Deleuze and Beyond: An Overview of Surveillance Theories from the Panopticon to Participation,” Philosophy & Technology 30 (1) (2017): 9–37.
walls separating work spaces: Maria Konnikova, “The Open Office Trap,” New Yorker, 7 January 2014.
lower job satisfaction: M. C. Davis, D. J. Leach, and C. W. Clegg, “The Physical Environment of the Office: Contemporary and Emerging Issues,” in International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology 26, ed. G. P. Hodgkinson and J. K. Ford (Chichester, UK: Wiley, 2011), 193–235.
less social interaction: Ethan Bernstein and Ben Waber, “The Truth about Open Offices,” Harvard Business Review, November–December 2019.
buy train tickets: Louise Matsakis, “How the West Got China’s Social Credit System Wrong,” Wired, 29 July 2019.
$250 billion and $400 billion: Eugene Soltes, Why They Do It: Inside the Mind of the White-Collar Criminal (New York: Public Affairs, 2016).
twenty-five times more costly: Stephen M. Rosoff, Henry N. Pontell, and Robert Tillman, Profit without Honor: White-Collar Crime and the Looting of America (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004).
without rigorous checks: C. Michel, “Violent Street Crime versus Harmful White-Collar Crime: A Comparison of Perceived Seriousness and Punitiveness,” Critical Criminology 24 (1) (2016): 127–43.
“jail the bad guys”: Anas Aremeyaw Anas, undercover journalist, interview, 8 October 2018.
soliciting bribes: “Accused Ghana Judges Shown Bribe Videos,” BBC News, 10 September 2015.
Ahmed Hussein-Suale: “Journalist Who Exposed Football Corruption Shot Dead in Ghana,” Agence France-Presse, 17 January 2019.
put a finger to their lips: Joel Gunter, “Murder in Accra: The Life and Death of Ahmed Hussein-Suale,” BBC News, 30 January 2019.
quickly cleaned up their act: A. Salisbury, “Cutting the Head off the Snake: An Empirical Investigation of Hierarchical Corruption in Burkina Faso,” no. 2018-11, Centre for the Study of African Economies (Oxford: University of Oxford, 2018).
right people seeing: R. Reinikka and J. Svensson, “Fighting Corruption to Improve Schooling: Evidence from a Newspaper Campaign in Uganda,” Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (2–3) (2005): 259–67.
I Paid a Bribe: See Y. Y. Ang, “Authoritarian Restraints on Online Activism Revisited: Why ‘I-Paid-a-Bribe’ Worked in India but Failed in China,” Comparative Politics 47 (1) (2014): 21–40.
failed the clean test: M. Bertrand et al., “Does Corruption Produce Unsafe Drivers?,” no. w12274, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.
precincts that aren’t monitored: N. Ichino and M. Schündeln, “Deterring or Displacing Electoral Irregularities? Spillover Effects of Observers in a Randomized Field Experiment in Ghana,” Journal of Politics 74 (1) (2012): 292–307.
routine drugs bust: This episode is detailed in Charles Campisi, Blue on Blue: An Insider’s Story of Good Cops Catching Bad Cops (New York: Scribner, 2017).
“more difficult to steal”: Charles Campisi, former head of Internal Affairs at NYPD, phone interview, 17 March 2020.
twelve times more than the reality: See Campisi, Blue on Blue.
randomly entered into a lottery: Charlie Sorrel, “Swedish Speed-Camera Pays Drivers to Slow Down,” Wired, 6 December 2010.

Chapter XIII: Waiting for Cincinnatus

“army were blockaded”: Ernest Rhys, ed., Livy’s History of Rome: Book 3 (London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1905), http://mcadams.posc.mu.edu/txt/ah/Livy/Livy03.html.
“intent on his husbandry”: Ibid.
“resigned on the sixteenth day”: Ibid.
“opposite practices in everything”: Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, bk. 10, chap. 17.6.









Index
A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the beginning of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or phrase, use your reading system’s search function.

Abhisit Vejjajiva, 129–34
Acton, John Dalberg-Acton, Baron, 128, 140, 148, 154, 157, 163, 245, 246
addiction, and social status, 166–68
aging rates

power and status and, 173–75, 176, 177
stress in CEOs and, 176, 177

Agnello, Rich, 85–87
agriculture

hierarchy and food supply in, 33–34, 35
rice-versus-wheat divide in, 108–10
warfare defending land in, 34–35

Alexander the Great, 77
Allison, Eric, 135–39, 146
al-Sadr, Muqtada, 124
Anas, Anas Aremeyaw, 233–35, 240
Anderson, Cameron, 104, 156
Anderson, Jordan, 172, 173–74
anger, and psychopaths, 94, 98–99
Ardant du Picq, 215
Ardern, Jacinda, 76
Arendt, Hannah, 155
Aristophanes, 74–75
Asian men and women

percentage as CEOs, 63–64
police recruitment of, 53–55

audits, of decision-making processes, 195–99
authoritarian learning, 139–40
Babiak, Paul, 96
baby-faced appearance, and threat perception, 81–82
Ban, Hajnal, 78–79
Batavia (ship), 1–4, 17, 29
Beard, Mary, 74–75
behavior

beliefs about systems and, 114
Big Gods hypothesis and divine surveillance of, 224–29
cultural influences on, 108–9
fundamental attribution error in interpreting, 110–11
impact of power on, 155–64
in-group and out-group biases in, 80–81
psychological distance and, 214–18
regional corruption areas and changes in, 113–14
reminders of responsibility for, 205–6
Stanford Prison Experiment on, 11–13

Bellamy, Richard, 134
Bentham, Jeremy, 229–31
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, 150–54
Big Gods hypothesis, 224–29
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 104–5
Black men and women. See also minorities

baby-faced appearance and perception as threat, 81–82
percentage as CEOs, 63–64
perception as strangers, 81

Blair, Tony, 203–4
Boehm, Chris, 26–27, 29
Bokassa, Jean-Bédel, 42–43, 44–45, 105
Bokassa, Marie-France, 42, 43–46
Borgschulte, Mark, 175–76
Bourdieu, Pierre, 69–70
Brain Sciences (journal), 159
Bregman, Rutger, 6
Bremer, L. Paul III “Jerry,” 120–25
bribery

beliefs about police and offers of, 114
driving tests and, 236–37
as job attraction for corruptible people, 15–16
rotation to protect against, 194
undercover journalism on, 235–36

Brion, Sebastien, 104
British Medical Journal, 176
Brooks, Cornell William, 204–5
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruno, 120
Bühren, Christoph, 193–94
Bundy, Ted, 94, 96
Bush, George W., 122, 125, 211
businesses. See also CEOs

appearance (“white guy in a tie”) and credibility in, 61–63
eliminating abstract nature of decision-making in, 210
need for data on demographic composition of leaders in, 82
percentage of women and ethnic minorities as CEOs in, 63–65
power paradox in, 157–58
shadow Board of Directors in, 190
Snowy Peaks and Vanilla Boys problems in, 65
white-collar crime in, 218, 232–33

Butler, Robin, 201–3
Campbell, Kim, 205
Campisi, Charles, 239–40
car-crosswalk experiment, 156–57, 163
Carleton College, 194–95
Carnegie Mellon University, 186
Carneiro, Robert, 34–35
Carney, Dana, 68–69
caveman effect, 39
CEOs

advantage of baby-faced appearance of, 82
emotional proximity of, 218–19
impact of stress on, 175–77
impact of targeting corruption by, 235
manipulation of data for good impression by, 198
need for demographic data on, 82
office design and monitoring by, 232–33
percentage of psychopaths as, 99
percentage of women and ethnic minorities as, 63–65
psychological distance and, 215, 218
routine stress for, without health effects, 171–72
screening and psychological evaluations for, 187
Snowy Peaks and Vanilla Boys problems in, 65
stress and aging and death rates for, 175–76, 177

Challenger explosion, 199
Cheeseman, Nic, 140
children

facial features in selection of leaders by, 14–15
sharing of rewards by, 21–22
surveillance and behavior of, 227

Churchill, Winston, 134–35
Cincinnatus, Lucius Quinctius, 243–45
Citizen Assembly model, 189–90
civil service

corruption of, as job attraction for corruptible people, 15–16
employee rotation in, 193–94
status changes and health of workers in, 169–70

Clacton Spear, 25
cliodynamics, 30
cocaine use, and hierarchy, rank, and status, 165–68
collaboration

rewards and lucky-unlucky status of children and, 21–22
shipwrecked boys and, 4–6

Columbia University, Statistical Research Group (SRG), 37–38
competition

for homeowners’ association leadership, 56–57
picking leaders and, 245–46
police recruitment and, 54–55
for power, 40, 191
for status, 36, 59

conspicuous consumption, 69
convenience sampling, 158–59
Cook, Ewing, 143–44
cooperation, and shipwrecked boys, 4–6
Cornelisz, Jeronimus, 2–4
corruptible people, 120–48

ability to rise through the ranks by, 89–90, 157
aphorisms about power and, 128
attraction of power for, 16
authority figures and leaders as, 41
dark triad traits and, 97
dirty hands problem and, 129–35
four phenomena in relationship between corruption and, 128
lack of competition and, 59
lack of supervision (“under the microscope”) and, 145–48
learning to be good at being bad and, 135–41
need to reform systems to reduce number of, 125–26
opportunity knocks and, 141–45
Rajneesh movement and, 151–54
randomized testing of, 238–41
regional corruption areas and behavior changes in, 113–14
rotation to protect against, 192–94
screening out in recruitment, 183, 187
survivorship bias and, 40–41
systems that attract and promote, 41, 125
tip of the iceberg problem and, 147–48, 163–64

corruption

aphorisms about power and, 128
bad systems and leader’s use of, 15–16
behavior changes and beliefs about, 114
dictators’ innovative approaches to, 139–40
gender discrimination and, 74
Madagascar presidency and, 10–11
policing mechanism in insects and, 114–16
power as factor in beginning of, 11
Sheela on, in Rajneesh movement, 154
undercover journalism on, 233–36

counterfactual, 132–33
Creighton, Mandell, 127–28
criminals

advantage of baby-faced appearance of, 81
Big Gods hypothesis and divine surveillance and, 224–29
hiring of, as officers, 181–87
lack of supervision (“under the microscope”) and, 145–48
learning to be good at being bad and, 135–39
Madoff’s fraud and, 146–47
military police against, 50–51
opportunity knocks, and, 141–45
ordeals to prove guilt of, 221–23
police drug team corruption and, 191–92
Rajneesh movement and, 151–54, 163
rotation to protect against, 194
Stanford Prison Experiment and, 11–13
systems of accountability for, 218
tip of the iceberg problem and, 147–48
undercover journalism on, 234
white-collar, 218, 232–33

crimes against humanity, 120
crosswalk experiment, 156–57, 163
Cuddy, Amy, 68
cults of personality, 140
cultural influences

behavior affected by, 108–9
chair movers and solo-sippers in Starbucks and, 107–9
learned racism and, 80–81
regional corruption area moves and behavior changes and, 113–14
rice theory on, 108–10
thinking affected by, 109–10

dark triad traits

continuum of traits in, 90
dictators with, 101–2
elected officials with, 100
management candidates and, 96–97
professional positions with, 99, 102
psychopaths and, 90–91, 96, 101

Darwin, Charles, 173, 175
Dash, Mike, 3
death rates, and stress in CEOs, 175–76
decision-making processes

audits of, 195–99
eliminating abstract nature of, 207–10
emotional proximity in, 218–19
Letters of Last Resort and responsibility in, 201–4, 219
psychological distance and, 214–15
torture memo as example of abstraction in, 210–13, 215

de Mesquita, Bruno Bueno, 120
De Neve, Jan-Emmanuel, 46–47
de Waal, Frans, 18–19, 66
Diamond, Jared, 33–34, 79
dictator game, 160–61, 163, 228
dictators

dark triad traits and, 101–2
invention of myths about, 140–41
learning how to get and hold power by, 138–41
Saddam Hussein’s behavior as, 121–25

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, 244
diplomats, and parking rules, 111–13
Dirty Dozen questions, 90–91
Dirty Hands (Sartre), 133
dirty hands problem, 128, 129–35
driving-test kickbacks, 236–37
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 165, 238–39
drug teams, corruption in, 191–92
drug use, and hierarchy, rank, and status, 165–68
Duhamel, Georges, 204
Dunlop, John, 118
Dutton, Kevin, 99, 102
earning capacity, and height, 78–79
elections

ancient Greek approach to using randomness in, 189
dictators’ innovative approaches to stealing, 139–40
facial features of leaders and votes in, 14–15
Madagascar’s corruption in, 10–11
monitoring of, 237–38
Rajneesh movement and, 151, 153

emotional contagion, 92–93
empathy, 92–94
environmental circumscription, 34
ethnic minorities

percentage as CEOs, 63–65
police recruitment of, 53–55

Everett, Emmett, 144
evolution

diet and brain size and, 71–72
DNA closeness between humans and chimpanzees and, 18
DNA mutations in, 20
multilevel selection and, 30–31
supernatural punishment hypothesis and, 226
use of ranged weapons and shoulder development in, 24–25

evolutionary leadership theory, 73
evolutionary psychology theories, 76
facial features

baby-faced appearance and threat perception, 81–82
selection of leaders by, 14–15

facial-recognition software, 76, 232
farming

hierarchy and food supply increases in, 33–34, 35
warfare defending land in, 34–35

Feinberg, Ken, 206–10, 213
fighter plane design, 39–41
fight-or-flight response, 171
Fink, Sheri, 143–44, 145
First Agricultural Revolution, 33
Fisman, Ray, 112–13
FitzGerald, Frances, 152
Flaherty, Richard, 25
Floyd, George, 49
food supply, and hierarchy development, 33–34, 35
Foucault, Michel, 230
Franklin, Benjamin, 244
Friedrich Wilhelm I, King of Prussia, 77–78
functional psychopaths, 102
fundamental attribution error, 110–11
Galton, Francis, 187–89
Gates, Bill, 64, 70
Gates Foundation, 104–5
Gazzola, Valeria, 93–94
gender discrimination

grant funding and, 105
job application evaluations and, 74
physical size in perceptions of power and, 75–76

genetics

aging rate and, 173–74
DNA closeness between humans and chimpanzees in, 18
DNA mutations in evolution from primates in, 20
dominance and role of, 47–48
multilevel selection and, 30–31
twin study on factors in seeking power and, 46–47

Gesquiere, Laurence, 174
Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 75
Good Samaritan experiment, 205–6
government officials

audits of decision-making processes of, 198–99
corruption in, as attraction for corruptible people, 15–16
dirty hands problem in suppressing protests by, 130–34
driving-test kickbacks and, 236–37
innovative approaches to stealing elections by, 139–40
Letters of Last Resort and, 201–4, 219
percentage of women in, 65–66
surveillance and punishment threats by, 229
trickle-down effect of prosecuting higher-level officials, 235
undercover journalism on, 233–36

grant applications, confident language in, 104–5
Grossman, Dave, 215–16
Gruenfeld, Deborah, 156
Hare, Robert, 94, 96
health

social networks and, 178, 179–80
status changes and, 169–70, 177, 178
stress related to, 169, 170–71, 174

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 162
height of humans

agricultural revolution and, 33
earning capacity related to, 79
politicians and, 78–79
status and, 77–78
weapons use and, 25–26

Heracleitus, 31
Herland (Gilman), 75
hierarchy

agricultural revolution and food supply and, 33–34, 35
drug use experiment and, 165–68
hunter-gatherer bands and, 27–29, 33
!Kung rituals for controlling, 23–24
leader’s power over shipwrecked sailors and, 3–4, 6, 17
limits of flat societies and need for, 36
military use of ranged weapons and need for, 31–33
murder rates and power struggles in, 35–36
as a neutral tool in civilization, 36
ranged weapons use and flattening of, 25
rank in ship organization and, 1–2, 3
reverse dominance hierarchy and flattening of, 26–27
warfare defending land and, 34–35

Hochschild, Adam, 119
homeowners’ associations (HOAs), leadership of, 56–59
homicide rates. See also murders

hunter-gatherers and, 28, 35–36
police use of surplus military equipment and, 52
power struggles in hierarchies and, 35–36

honesty box experiment, 228
Hopkins, Kyle, 182–83
hospitals, and hurricane triage, 142–45
hunter-gatherer societies

band structure and lack of hierarchy in, 27–29, 33
encounters with strangers by, 79–80
gods and moral transgressions in, 223–24, 226
hierarchy rituals and power in, 23–24
homicide rates in, 28, 35–36
power-hungry upstarts in, 28–29
size in leadership selection in, 73

Hussein, Saddam, 101, 121, 122–23
Hussein-Suale, Ahmed, 234
Ichino, Andrea, 113–14
immune response, and status level, 174, 178–79
impression management, 95
incorruptible people

actively recruiting, 183–87, 199
audits of decision-making processes used by, 195–99
four lessons for road map for getting, 199
oversight by sortition in, 190–91, 199
randomness in selection of, 188–90, 199

Inquisition, 127–28
IRS, 147–48
job applications

blind recruitment policy and anonymity in, 82–83
diversity of selection panels in, 83
gender discrimination in, 74
impact of black-sounding names in, 82

job interviews, and psychopaths, 95
journalism, corruption coverage by, 233–36
judicium Dei (judgment of God), 221
Juvenal, 235
Kagame, Paul, 65–66
Kelly, Tom, 196–97
Keltner, Dacher, 155–59, 162, 163
Keysers, Christian, 93
Khrushchev, Nikita, 139
Kim Jong Un, 140
King, Helen, 51, 191–92
Kriss, Ron, 88, 89
!Kung, 23–24, 27
land, agricultural revolution and need for defending, 34–35
Larrey, Dominique-Jean, 142
Latino men and women, percentage as CEOs, 63–64
leaders. See also CEOs; political leaders

audits of decision-making processes used by, 195–99
bad systems and corruption of, 15–16
Cincinnatus legend on, 244–45
cooperation and friendship among shipwrecked boys and, 4–6
dark triad traits in, 96–97
eliminating abstract nature of decisions by, 207–10
emotional proximity of, 218–19
height and perception of, 78–79
homeowners’ associations and, 56–59
hunter-gatherers and authority of, 27–28
learning how to get and hold power by, 138–40
military use of ranged weapons and need for, 32–33
obsession with appearance of power of, 63
overconfidence of, 103–4
oversight by sortition and, 190–91, 199
percentage of women and ethnic minorities as, 63–65
physical size and perceptions of power of, 75–76
power hierarchy among shipwrecked sailors and, 3–4, 6
psychological distance and, 214–15, 218–19
reminders of responsibility for, 201–6
research on questions about power and, 7–8
reverse dominance hierarchy and, 26–27
savanna hypothesis on, 76–77
social distance used by, 216
spatial distance used by, 217–18
strength in perceptions of, 75–76, 77
torture memo as example of abstraction in work of, 210–13, 215

leader selection

attraction of bad qualities of leaders and, 16
baby-faced appearance and, 81–82
evolutionary history and, 72–73
facial features and, 14–15
in-group and out-group biases in, 80–81
physical appearance and, 72–73, 76–77

leadership positions

motivations for seeking, 48–49
need for data on demographic composition of, 82
people who want to control others and, 59
psychopaths’ choice of profession for, 99
self-selection bias in seeking, 41–42, 59
skewed preferences and mismatches in, 73
survivorship bias and, 40–41
twin study on genetic factors in, 46–47

learned racism, 80–81
learning to be good at being bad, 128, 135–41
Lee, Richard, 23
Leeson, Peter, 222–23
Leopold II, King of Belgium, 117–20
Letters of Last Resort, 201–4, 219
Liberman, Andres, 114
Lieberman, Daniel, 72
Lincoln, Abraham, 135
Livy, 243
London Metropolitan Police, 191–92
Machiavelli, Niccoló, 90
Machiavellianism. See also dark triad traits

prison experiment on, 13
professions with controlled amount of, 102
psychopaths with, 90, 91, 95, 96, 105

Madoff, Bernie, 146–47, 232
Maggi, Giovanni, 113–14
managers. See also senior management

audits of decision-making processes of, 196–97

Manchester United study, 80–81, 82
manie sans delire, 92
Mao Zedong, 139
Markopolos, Harry, 147
Marmot, Sir Michael, 168–70, 171–72, 175, 176–77
Marshall Project, 52
McClelland, David, 49
McCormack, Win, 152
McFife, Martin, 56–58, 105
Memorial Medical Center, New Orleans, 142–45
men

percentage as CEOs, 63–65
physical size in perceptions of power of, 75–77
use of ranged weapons and size of, 25

Merkel, Angela, 18, 76
Miguel, Edward, 112–13
Mike, Nimeron, 181–83
Milgram experiments, 155
military

agricultural revolution and land defense by, 34–35
ex-soldiers as police officers, 52
height and status in, 77–78
multilevel selection and, 30–31
police use of surplus equipment from, 50–52
ranged weapons and need for hierarchy in, 31–33

Minnesota Twins baseball team, 196–97
Minnesota Twin study, 46–47
minorities. See also Black men and women; ethnic minorities

percentage as CEOs, 63–65
perception of racial bias in policing and, 55
police recruitment and, 50–51, 54–55
“strangers” template and white person’s view of, 81

mirror neuron system, 92
Monty Python and the Holy Grail (film), 224–25
moral insanity, 92
morality

Big Gods hypothesis and, 224–29
hunter-gatherers and, 223–24, 226
opportunity knocks and, 141–45

Morel, E. D., 118–19
Moss-Racusin, Corinne, 74
move calls, 103
Moxley, Mitch, 61–63, 71
multilevel selection, 30–31
murders. See also homicide rates

hurricane hospital care and, 142–45
King Leopold’s Congo policies and, 119–20
Rajneesh movement and, 152–54

Mussolini, Benito, 198–99
myths, about dictators, 140–41
Nader, Michael, 165–68, 179
narcissism. See also dark triad traits

as motivation to seek power, 219
prison experiment on, 13
professions with controlled amount of, 102
psychopaths with, 90, 95, 96, 99, 102

Nashoanak, Joan, 183
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), 204–5
natural experiments, 112, 113, 116, 120, 175
natural selection, 30
Nature (journal), 28, 104
Neumann, Craig, 96
newspapers, corruption coverage by, 233–36
New York Police Department (NYPD), randomized tests in, 238–40
1984 (Orwell), 232, 240
Norenzayan, Ara, 223–27
nPow, 49
open-plan offices, 231
opportunity knocks, and criminal people, 128, 141–45
ordeals, and guilt or innocence, 221–23
Orwell, George, 232, 240
overconfidence

grant application language and, 104–5
leaders and, 103–4

oversight by sortition, 190–91, 199
panopticon, 230–31
parking rules, and diplomats, 111–13
Patel, Sheela Ambalal, 149–54, 163
Peter, Laurence J., 193
Peter Principle, 193
Phillips, Trevor, 65
physical appearance

advantage of baby-faced appearance, 81–82
leader selection based on, 72–73, 76–77
power and, 63, 68–69
“white guy in a tie” approach for credibility and, 61–63, 71

Piazza, Jared, 227
Pinel, Philippe, 92
Pitt, William the Elder, 128
Plato, 72
police departments, 49–55

behavior changes and beliefs about, 114
convicted repeat offenders as officers in, 181–87
ethnic composition of, 55
ex-soldiers serving in, 52
homicide rates for civilians in, 52
perception of racial bias in, 55
recruitment videos for, 50–51, 53–55, 59
reform efforts for, 49, 52–53, 55
surplus military equipment in, 50–52
surveillance and punishment threats by, 229

policing mechanism, and “corrupt” behavior, 114–16
political leaders. See also dictators

Citizen Assembly model and, 189–90
dirty hands problem in getting votes by, 135
dirty hands problem in suppressing protests by, 130–34
drug team corruption in, 191–92
height of presidents as, 78
Letters of Last Resort and, 201–4, 219
masculine show of power by, 75–77
percentage of women in, 65–66
stress and aging and death rates for, 176

political systems, including normal people in decision-making of, 191
Pollard, Katherine S., 20–21
potlatch ceremonies, 69
Potsdam Giants, 77–78
Pou, Anna, 143–45
power

aging rate and, 173–75, 176, 177
aphorisms about corruption and, 128
approach behaviors in, 156
baby-faced appearance and access to, 81–82
bad systems and leader’s attraction to 15–16
Bokassa family’s desire for, 42–45
corruptible people and attraction of, 16
dirty hands problem in wielding, 129–35
emergence of military leaders with need for, 33
genetic role in dominance and, 48
human size and weapons use for, 25–26
!Kung rituals for controlling, 23–24
learning how to get and hold, 138–41
Lord Acton’s aphorism on, 8, 128, 140, 148, 154, 157, 163, 245, 246
male gender advantage in, 75–76
measures of need for, 49
motivations for seeking, 48–49
murder rates and struggles for, in hierarchies, 35–36
as a neutral tool in civilization, 36
obsession with leaders’ appearance of, 63
physical size and perceptions of, 75–77
power paradox for people holding, 157–58
prison experiment on attraction of, 11–14
research on impact on individuals of, 155–64
research on questions about leaders and, 7–8
risk-taking and, 161–62
self-selection bias in seeking, 41–42, 59
sharing behavior and amount of, 160–61
Sheela on use of, in Rajneesh movement in Oregon, 154
shoulder development and use of ranged weapons for, 25
signaling behavior for showing appearance of, 68–69
status for showing, 69–71
survivorship bias and, 40–41
twin study on genetic factors in seeking, 46–47

Power Approach and Inhibition Theory, 156
“power corrupts…” aphorism (Lord Acton), 8, 128, 140, 148, 154, 157, 163, 245, 246
power pose, 68–69, 158, 160
prime ministers

challenge of being first woman as, 205
Letters of Last Resort and, 201–4, 219
protests suppressed by, 130–34

Princeton University, 205–6
prisons

Bentham’s design of, 230–31
memo on torture in, 210–13, 215
Stanford psychology experiment on, 11–14, 155

ProPublica, 182
protests, leader’s suppression of, 130–34
psychological distance, 214–19
psychopaths, 85–103

abusive behavior as choice or personality defect by, 111
anger in, 94, 98–99
audits of decision-making processes of, 198
dark triad components in, 90–91, 96
diagnosis of, 91
dictators and, 101–2
Dirty Dozen questions in diagnosing, 90–91
empathy and, 93
functional aspects of, 102
job interviews and, 95
as managers, 96–97
professional effectiveness of, 100–101
professions with, 99
school maintenance man’s rise to leadership as example of, 85–89
successful blending in by, 94–95
superficial charm of, 93, 94, 95, 100, 102
ultimatum game studies of, 97–99

psychopathy, in dark triad, 90
punishment

ordeals to prove guilt and, 221–23
surveillance and threat of, 224–29

Putin, Vladimir, 75–76
racial minorities See minorities
racism

baby-faced appearance and threat perception and, 81–82
demographics of CEO leadership and, 82
forging broader forms of shared identity for combating, 82
impact of cultural learning on, 81
in-group and out-group biases and, 80–81, 82
percentage of minority CEOs and, 64–65
police abuse and, 55
ways of combating, 82–83

Rajneesh, Bhagwan Shree, 150–54
Rajneesh Medical Corporation, 151, 152–53, 154
Rajneesh movement (Rajneeshees), 150–54
Rancho Rajneesh, Oregon, 150–54
randomized testing, 238–41
randomness, in employee selection, 188–90, 199
rank

drug use experiment and, 165–68
ship’s hierarchical organization by, 1–2, 3

Ratnieks, Francis, 115, 116
Raucci, Steve, 85–89, 90, 94, 98–99, 105, 125, 198
Ravalomanana, Marc, 8–11
Ray, John, 102
recognition, power and need for, 49, 90
recruitment

active approaches to, 183–87, 199
blind policies and anonymity in, 82–83
expanding applicant pool in, 183–84
police departments and, 50–51, 53–55
proactively seeking out the right kind of people in, 183, 184–86
screening out corrupt and corruptible people in, 183, 187

religion and religious movements

Big Gods hypothesis and divine surveillance and, 224–29
hunter-gatherers and, 223–24
ordeals to prove guilt and, 221–23
Rajneesh movement and, 149–54, 163
Spanish Inquisition and, 127–28

replication crisis, 68, 158
research

controlled conditions issue in, 163
convenience sampling in, 158–59
replication crisis in, 68, 158
WEIRD problem in, 158–59

research grants, confident language in, 104–5
reverse dominance hierarchy, 26–27
rewards

lucky-unlucky status of children and sharing of, 21–22
macaques’ use of levers on intelligence panel for earning, 167
powerful approach life and, 156

rice theory, 108–10
risk-taking, and having power, 161–62
Roach, Neil Thomas, 24
Royal Australian Navy, 134–35
Rumsfeld, Donald, 122
Ryan, Kaye, 53
Saddam Hussein, 101, 121, 122–23
Sadr, Muqtada al-, 124
Salisbury, Adam, 235
Sapolsky, Robert, 170–71, 174
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 133
savanna hypothesis, 76–77
schools, combating teacher bias in, 73
screening process, in recruitment, 183, 187
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 146–47
selection bias, 39
self-selection bias, 41–42, 59, 163
seminary students, understanding of responsibility by, 205–6
Semione, Lou, 86–87
senior management. See also CEOs

psychopaths and, 96–97
Snowy Peaks and Vanilla Boys problems in, 65

September 11, 2001, attacks, 121–22, 207–10
sexism

demographics of CEO leadership and, 82
percentage of women CEOs and, 64–65
perceptions of women and power and, 74–75
physical size in perceptions of leadership power and, 75–77
ways of combating, 82–83

shadow boards of directors, 190
sharing

chimpanzee experiment on, 22
lucky-unlucky status of children and, 21–22
power and level of, 160–61

Sheela, Ma Anand, 149–54, 163
Sheldahl, Barry, 153
ships, rank and hierarchical organization on, 1–2, 3
shipwrecked sailors

cooperation among, 4–6
leader’s power hierarchy and murder among, 3–4, 6, 17

Sholes, Christopher Latham, 184–85
signaling behavior, 65–71

animal use of, 65–66
appearance of power and, 68–69
cost of, 66–67, 70
impression management and, 95
physical size and perceptions of leadership in, 75–76
power pose in, 68–69
status and, 69–71

signaling theory, 67–68
Singer, Peter, 213–14
Singh, Manvir, 28, 34
size of humans

agricultural revolution and, 33
leader selection based on, 73
perceptions of leadership and, 75–76
weapons use and, 25–26

Snowy Peaks problem, 65
social distance, 216, 217–18
Social Dominance Orientation (SDO), 49
social networks, and health, 178, 179–80
Society of the Cincinnati, 244–45
Soltes, Eugene, 218
sortition, 189–91
Space Shuttle Challenger explosion, 199
Spanish Inquisition, 127–28
spatial distance, 215, 217–18
Stanford Prison Experiment, 11–13, 14, 155
Starbucks, customer behavior observations in, 107–9
Statistical Research Group (SRG), Columbia University, 37–38
statistics and statistical methods

fighter plane design and, 38–40
military use of, 37–38
survivorship bias and, 39–40

status

aging rate and, 173–75, 176, 177
changes over time in, 70–71
drug use experiment and, 165–68
health and level of, 169–70, 177, 178
height as predictor of, 77–78
immune response and, 174, 178–79
signaling behavior for showing, 69–71
stress impact and, 172, 174–75

Status Syndrome, 170
Stevens, Thaddeus, 135
Stockholm syndrome, 44
strength, and perceptions of leadership, 75–76, 77
stress response

status level and health effects of, 172, 174–75
survival and biological changes in, 170–71

students, and teacher bias, 73
supernatural punishment hypothesis, 226
Surowiecki, James, 188
surveillance, 221–37

Bentham’s prison design for, 230–31
criminal behavior changes and, 224–29
digital technology for, 231
of office workers, 231, 233

survivorship bias, 39–41
Sydney (ship), 134–35
Syed, Matthew, 184
systems

behavior changes and beliefs about, 114
example of a decent person working in a bad system, 122–25
King Leopold’s policies and, 117–20
parking violations and enforcement in, 113
policing mechanism and “corrupt” behavior in, 115–16
preventing corruptible individuals from gaining power in, 125–26

Talhelm, Thomas, 108
tanning, as status signal, 70–71
tax fraud, 147–48
teacher bias, 73
ten Brinke, Leanne, 100–101
1033 Program, 51, 52
thinking, cultural influences on, 109–10
Thirteenth Amendment, 135
thymos (need for recognition), 49
tip of the iceberg problem, 147–48, 163–64
Tomasello, Michael, 21–22
torture, memo on use of, 210–13, 215
triage, in medical care, 142–45
trial by ordeal, 221–23
Trope, Yaacov, 214–15
Tung, Jenny, 172–73, 174, 176, 178–79
Turchin, Peter, 29–31, 33, 35, 36
Turchin, Valentin, 29
twin study, on genetic factors in seeking power, 46–47
ultimatum game studies, 97–99
undercover journalism, 233–36
under the microscope, 128, 145–48
US Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), 165, 238–39
US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 146–47
University College London, 229–30
Vanilla Boys problem, 65
van Vugt, Mark, 24, 73, 76
Veblen, Thorstein, 69
Vietnam War, 25, 215–16
Voltaire, 226
Wald, Abraham, 37–40, 49
Walzer, Michael, 133
warfare

agricultural revolution and lend defense using, 34–35
dirty hands problem in deciphering codes during, 134–35
fighter plane design in, 38–40
height of soldiers in, 77–78
psychological distance in, 215–17
ranged weapons and need for hierarchy in, 31–33
statistical methods in, 37–38
triage in medical care during, 142

Warner, Peter, 5–6
Washington, George, 244
wealth, signaling behavior for, 69–70
weapons use

agricultural revolution and land defense with, 34–35
evolutionary change and, 24–25
need for hierarchy and, 31–33
physical size differences between males and females and, 25
psychological distance in, 215–17

Weber, Max, 226
WEIRD problem, in research, 158–59
Wenseleers, Tom, 115
Western Kentucky University, 13–14
white-collar crime, 218, 232–33
“white guy in a tie” approach, for business credibility, 61–63
Whitehall II Study, 169–70, 175, 176–77
Williams, George Washington, 120
women

challenge of being first woman as Canadian prime minister, 205
height of, in perception of leadership, 78–79
job application evaluation and, 74
percentage as CEOs, 63–65
percentage in elected positions, 65–66
physical size in perceptions of power of, 75–76
police recruitment and, 50–51, 54–55
recruitment approaches for, 186
research grant funding and, 105
sexist perceptions of power and, 74–75
use of ranged weapons and size of, 25

World War II

dirty hands problem in deciphering codes in, 134–35
fighter plane design in, 38–40
Rosenstrasse protest against detention of Jews during, 216
statistical methods in, 37–38

Yap, Andy, 68
Yong, Ed, 92
Yoo, John, 210–13, 215
Zimbardo, Philip, 11–13, 155










Scribner
An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2021 by Brian Klaas
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information, address Scribner Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
First Scribner hardcover edition November 2021
SCRIBNER and design are registered trademarks of The Gale Group, Inc., used under license by Simon & Schuster, Inc., the publisher of this work.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to book an event, contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Wendy Blum
Jacket design by Jaya Miceli
Jacket artwork by Serazetdinov/iStock/Getty Images
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Klaas, Brian P. (Brian Paul), 1986– author.
Title: Corruptible: who gets power and how it changes us / by Brian Klaas.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021014213 | ISBN 9781982154097 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781982154103 (paperback) | ISBN 9781982154110 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Power (Social sciences) | Leadership. | Dictators.
Classification: LCC HN49.P6 .K57 2021 | DDC 303.3—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021014213
ISBN 978-1-9821-5409-7
ISBN 978-1-9821-5411-0 (ebook)









Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.


CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP


Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.










We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases, deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up and see terms and conditions.


CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP


Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in your inbox.




